Title: URecJPQ: Memory-efficient Multimodal Recommendation Models through RecJPQ in Large-Scale Scenarios

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.23291v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 03:42:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# URecJPQ : Memory-efficient Multimodal Recommendation Models through RecJPQ in Large-Scale Scenarios 

# Giuseppe Spillo 1* , Zixuan Yi 2, Aleksandr Petrov 3,Cataldo Musto 1, Craig Macdonald 2, Iadh Ounis 2

> 1

University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy. 

> 2

University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. 

> 3

Spotify, Glasgow, United Kingdom. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): giuseppe.spillo@uniba.it; Contributing authors: z.yi.1@research.gla.ac.uk; aleksandrv@spotify.com; cataldo.musto@uniba.it; craig.macdonald@glasgow.ac.uk; iadh.ounis@glasgow.ac.uk; 

Abstract 

Training state-of-the-art recommendation models on large-scale industrial datasets can be a challenging task due to the high number of users and items which are typically represented through ID embeddings. Such embeddings typi-cally require a large amount of memory resources, which are not always available. This problem is further exacerbated in multimodal recommendation, in which multimodal item features generally improve recommendation performance, but require more resources to encode. In this paper, we introduce URecJPQ , a Joint Product Quantization method specifically designed for large-scale and multi-modal top-k recommendation tasks, in which the vast number of users and items, combined with the available modalities, further increases the memory demands for the computation. The core idea is to represent each user/item not as a fully learned, unique embedding, but rather as a concatenation of shared learned sub-embeddings, thereby significantly reducing the total number of trainable parameters. Our experiments on three widely-used datasets across different domains (movies, baby and sports products) show that URecJPQ can be effectively applied to multimodal recommendation settings. In large scale sce-narios, we observe a substantial reduction in checkpoint sizes and the number of trainable parameters (ranging from 86% to 98%, and 98% to 99%, respec-tively), with only a marginal decrease in accuracy (8.5% on recall and 16% 

1 

> arXiv:2606.23291v1 [cs.IR] 22 Jun 2026 This manuscript is currently under peer review.
> on NDCG, on average), and, in some cases, even performance improvements (up to 85%), as in the baby products domain. Our codebase is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/large mmrecjpq-839B/README.md.
> Keywords: Recommender Systems, Multimodal Recommendation, Joint Product Quantization

# 1 Introduction 

In the last decades, Recommender Systems (RSs) have emerged as an effective technology to tackle the problem of information overload and support users in 

decision-making tasks (Resnick and Varian (1997)). RSs are often used in e-commerce platforms, in order to match user preferences with potentially relevant items in their catalog. Many RS approaches have been proposed in the literature, ranging from early Collaborative Filtering (Schafer et al. (2007))approaches, to sophisticated ones leveraging multimodal content to provide personalized suggestions (Zhou et al. (2023)). To provide recommendations, RSs typically learn k -dimensional embeddings to represent users and items, which are commonly referred to as ID embeddings . ID embeddings are dense vector representations where each user and item’s unique iden-tifier is mapped to a continuous vector in a shared latent space (Yuan et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2022)). These vectors can be learned directly from the user-item inter-action data (e.g., via matrix factorization or neural collaborative filtering (Xue et al. (2017); He et al. (2017))) such that the similarity between a user’s embedding and an item’s embedding predicts the likelihood of an interaction or the user’s preference. However, in large-scale recommendation scenarios, the system has to manage a mas-sive number of users and items, learning unique embeddings for each user and for each item. The embeddings are typically trained on GPUs exploiting backpropagation, which means, on one hand, that the embeddings need to be stored in the GPU, and this requires enough memory. In addition, the backpropagation requires storing additional components, including the gradients, further increasing GPU memory requirements. For example, the Amazon Reviews ’23 dataset provided by Hou et al. (2024), which represents only a filtered subset of the much larger global Amazon catalog, contains 54 million users and 48 million items. Storing the full embeddings for these entities would require more than 13 billion parameters, without considering the additional parameters needed for the RS model intermediate layers. This problem is further exac-erbated in the case of multimodal recommendation (Zhou (2023)). Indeed, multimodal approaches generally improve recommendation performance, as shown by Yi et al. (2025), but require more trainable parameters to process and encode multimodal data, such as item images or textual descriptions. A possible solution to the memory requirements for learning full embeddings con-sists in compressing the embeddings through quantization , originaly proposed by Gray (1984), in order to reduce the total number of learnable parameters and memory occupancy. The current literature has exploited quantization primarily for sequen-tial recommendation tasks (Mallamaci et al. (2025); Petrov and Macdonald (2024); This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

Fig. 1 : Overview of our URecJPQ method and its application in multimodal recom-mendation. Rajput et al. (2023); Zeghidour et al. (2021)), in which the aim is to predict the next item users will interact with. For example, RecJPQ proposed by Petrov and Mac-donald (2024) is a recent approach that learns quantized item ID embeddings in an end-to-end manner (instead of post-quantization) for next-item prediction. However, the use of quantization to improve memory efficiency in traditional top-k recommen-dation scenarios remains overlooked, and even less so in multimodal recommendation. In this paper, we address this gap by extending RecJPQ to the multimodal and top-k

recommendation setting for large-scale catalogs. In doing so, this paper makes the following contributions: 

• We successfully extend RecJPQ to the top-k recommendation scenario, by quantiz-ing not only item ID embeddings as in sequential recommendation, but also user ID embeddings – we call this extension URecJPQ .

• We apply URecJPQ to multimodal recommendation in large-scale catalog scenarios, thus drastically reducing the number of trainable parameters. 

• We quantitatively analyze the trade-off between the decrease of the total number of trainable model parameters (and model checkpoint sizes) and the recommendation performance. This paper is structured as follows: in Section 2, we analyze related works, while in Section 3 we describe our methodology. In Section 4, we describe our experimental settings and in Section 5 we discuss our results from a quantitative perspective, while in Section 6 we provide a qualitative analysis. Finally, in Section 7, we draw our conclusions and sketch future works. This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

# 2 Related Work 

In this section, we first introduce the state-of-the-art of the quantization problem, then we review related papers in the recommendation domain that leverage quantization approaches. 

# 2.1 Product Quantization 

In order to reduce the memory occupancy and the number of trainable parameters, a possible solution is the Product Quantization (PQ) approach (Gray (1984); Jegou et al. (2010)), which is commonly used to compress collections of embeddings: its core idea is to split each embedding into smaller, non-overlapping sub-embeddings, and then independently quantize each sub-embedding by mapping it to the index of its closest centroid from a learned codebook (i.e., sub-IDs). As a result, the full embedding can be approximately reconstructed by concatenating its sub-embeddings, and used in any downstream task (including recommendation). Jegou et al. (2010) apply PQ principle to the approximate nearest neighbor search task showing increased efficiency, better performance, and excellent scalability to even large datasets. However, PQ requires enough memory to train the original full embeddings before compressing them (as shown by Petrov and Macdonald (2024)), and, since quantization is not differentiable, it is impossible to jointly compress the embeddings and perform downstream tasks in an end-to-end manner. This limitation is addressed by the Joint Product Quantization method introduced in Zhan et al. (2021) (JPQ), a PQ approach that assigns the sub-IDs before training the backbone model for the document retrieval task. The sub-ID assignment is the only non-differentiable operation in PQ, therefore, if the assignments occur before the model training, it can be trained in an end-to-end manner without learning the full embeddings. Then, when the full embeddings are needed, they are reconstructed by concatenating the sub-embeddings. In other words, JPQ can replace the embedding tensors of any backbone model without requiring other changes to the model itself. 

# 2.2 Quantization in Recommendation 

Quantization approaches have also been exploited in recommendation scenarios. For example, Lian et al. (2020) proposed LightRec, a recommendation model that compress only item ID embeddings through additive quantization (Babenko and Lem-pitsky (2014)), and uses the Deep Semantic Similarity Model (porposed by Huang et al. (2013)) as the backbone model together with a knowledge distillation component. However, it learns full item ID embeddings, and it is unclear whether the quantization can be used outside the Deep Semantic Similarity Model. Rajput et al. (2023) proposed TIGER, an extension of the Residual-Quantized Variational Autoencoder (RQ-VAE Zeghidour et al. (2021)) originally developed in the computer vision field. TIGER is a recommendation model inspired by generative retrieval methods (Tay et al. (2022)) and uses textual information to generate item representations. Instead of relying solely on ID-based embeddings, TIGER uses tex-tual side information during quantization to better capture item hierarchies, thereby improving next-item prediction in sequential recommendation. In principle, TIGER This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

can exploit other modalities (e.g., visual features) rather than only textual one, but this has never been investigated in the literature. Petrov and Macdonald (2024) proposed RecJPQ, an adaption of the JPQ method to the sequential recommendation scenario. Unlike TIGER, RecJPQ does not use resid-ual quantization or learn hierarchical or semantic embeddings. In RecJPQ, instead of learning full and unique item ID embeddings, the authors applied the JPQ principles to a number of backbone sequential models (BERT4Rec proposed by Sun et al. (2019), GRU proposed by Hidasi et al. (2015), SASRec proposed by Hidasi et al. (2015)) to significantly reduce the sizes of the trained models while maintaining comparable – or even improved – recommendation performance. A graphical illustration of RecJPQ is provided in Figure 2. Training shared sub-embeddings dramatically reduces the num-ber of trainable parameters and the gradients required for backpropagation, thereby lowering memory usage and enabling training on modern GPUs – even for large-scale catalogs. However, none of the aforementioned approaches (except LightRec) have inves-tigated the impact of quantization in either traditional top-k or multimodal recom-mendation, where both user and item ID embeddings are required to compute dot products and, consequently, recommendation scores. In contrast, existing methods such as TIGER and RecJPQ focus solely on quantizing item embeddings. Since we are also interested in user ID embeddings, and TIGER learns semantic item embeddings, our work builds on RecJPQ. To sum up, the novelty of our URecJPQ is twofold: first, it is the first to study quantization for both user and item ID embeddings in the context of top-k recommen-dation; second, it is the first to investigate quantization techniques in large-scale and multimodal recommendation settings. 

# 3 Methodology 

We now describe the original RecJPQ introduced by Petrov and Macdonald (2024) approach, which serves as a basis for our paper, and introduce URecJPQ, our extension for top-k recommendation. 

# 3.1 Basics of RecJPQ 

As mentioned above, RecJPQ allows an end-to-end training of sequential recom-mendation models with quantized item embeddings. In particular, given a collection of k-dimensional embeddings {v1, v 2, ..., v n} (for example, the items in a catalog), RecJPQ learns a number of d-dimensional sub-embeddings such that d ≪ k and 

d = km , with m being the number of sub-spaces considered for the quantization. The number of the sub-embeddings in each sub-space, denoted as the codebook length l,is typically a power p of 256, so that the codes can be stored in a p-byte integer struc-ture. Following Petrov and Macdonald (2024) and Zhan et al. (2021), by setting p = 1, each code can be represented by using a single byte. As a result, each sub-space has 256 sub-embeddings. In addition, RecJPQ supports multiple strategies for code assignment. The simplest strategy, random , assigns each item m random sub-IDs (from 0 to 255), one per This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

Fig. 2 : Embedding quantization in RecJPQ: an 8-dimensional embedding is approxi-mated by the concatenation of 4 sub-embeddings, each 2-dimensional. subspace. Its main limitation is that it may assign different sub-embeddings to similar items – or the same sub-embeddings to diverse items – risking a loss of semantic coherence. To preserve semantic consistency across items, Truncated SVD (Hansen (1987)) offers an alternative code assignment strategy. Specifically, performing SVD with m

latent factors on the interaction matrix Y provides low-dimensional user and item embeddings, such that similar users (items) are mapped to similar embeddings. For-mally, let Y ≈ U · Σ · IT , where U and I are the user and item embeddings, and Σ is a diagonal matrix of singular values. The resulting item embeddings I are normalized, and a small random noise is added to avoid identical embeddings for items with identical interaction histories. Each of the m dimensions of the normalized embeddings is then discretized into b quantiles, each containing roughly the same number of items. These quantile bins define the m

sub-IDs for each item – one per subspace. Figure 2 provides an example of this approach. Instead of learning isolated 8-dimensional embeddings, one per item, only 4 sub-spaces are learnt, each composed of smaller 2-dimensional sub-embeddings. A codebook table is used to map each full embedding with a sequence of sub-embeddings (though sub-IDs), that can be used to reconstruct the full embedding when needed. 

# 3.2 URecJPQ 

In Petrov and Macdonald (2024), the process described above is applied exclusively to item embeddings. This design choice aligns with the requirements of sequential 

recommendation, where users are typically represented by their interaction sequences rather than explicit ID embeddings. This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

In contrast, our proposed URecJPQ method extends this quantization framework to include user ID embeddings alongside item ID embeddings. This dual quantization is essential for the top-k recommendation scenario, where explicit vector representations for both users and items are required to compute recommendation scores. By quantiz-ing both user and item ID embeddings, URecJPQ maintains the necessary interaction logic while achieving the memory efficiency required for large-scale catalogs. Also in this case, given k-dimensional original embeddings, we aim to learn d-dimensional sub-embeddings such that d ≪ k and d = km , with m being the number of sub-spaces considered for the quantization, and l the codebook lenght (number of embeddings in each sub-space). To this aim, URecJPQ uses two code assignment stragies to builds the codebook tables for users and items, random and TruncatedSVD, similarly to RecJPQ. In the random code assignment strategy, random sub-IDs are assigned to both users and items, resulting in two codebook tables that are populated at random. In the Truncated SVD strategy, URecJPQ preserves semantic interaction patterns by first decomposing the user-item interaction matrix Y ≈ U · Σ · IT , where U and I

represent the latent factors for users and items, respectively. Item embeddings are stored in IT , while user embeddings are stored in U . To map these continuous factors to discrete codes, we set the number of SVD components equal to the number of subspaces m, such that each latent dimension i ∈ { 1, . . . , m } corresponds to a specific subspace. For each dimension, we apply quantile discretization using b bins. This process ensures that users and items are distributed evenly across the available sub-IDs in each subspace, effectively transforming the most significant global interaction signals into structured, discrete identifiers. To prevent collisions between entities with identical interaction histories, a small random noise ( ϵ ≈ 10 −5) is added to the embeddings prior to discretization. A distinctive trait of RecJPQ is its ability to support the end-to-end training of the sequential recommendation models into which it is integrated. URecJPQ inherits this property, making it applicable to any backbone model that explicitly uses user and item ID embeddings to provide top-k recommendation (including most of multimodal models): this improves their efficiency in terms of memory occupancy and number of trainable parameters. To illustrate the parameter efficiency of URecJPQ, we consider the BPR model (Rendle et al. (2012)), whose trainable parameters consist solely of user and item ID embeddings. In Figure 3, we compare BPR Rendle et al. (2012) and its quantized version URecJPQ-BPR Baby 23 dataset. In vanilla BPR (Fig. 3a), the total number of trainable parameters is computed as (# users + # items ) ∗ k, with k being the embedding size (64 in the example). This results in a total of (143 K + 44 K) ∗ 64 = 12 M parameters. In URecJPQ-BPR (Fig. 3b), the total number of trainable parameters becomes 256 ∗ m ∗ d, with m being the number of sub-spaces and d = km the sub-embedding size. This results in a total of 256 ∗ 16 ∗ 4 = 16 K parameters for user embeddings, and 256 ∗ 16 ∗ 4 = 16 K for item embeddings, for a total of 32 K parameters. From this example, we can see that URecJPQ dramatically decreases the num-ber of trainable parameters, from 12M to 32K for BPR (99.7%). When considering This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

(a) Traditional BPR model. The number of trainable parameters depends on the number of users (143K in the example), items (44K) and embedding size (64). 

(b) URecJPQ applied to the BPR model. The number of trainable parameters depends on the number of sub-IDs per space (256 in the example), the number of spaces (16), and the original sub-embedding size, computed as the ratio between the original embedding size (64) and the number of subspaces(4). 

Fig. 3 : Comparison between the number of trainable parameters of the BPR model on the Baby23 dataset, for 143K users and 44K items. The vanilla version has 12M total trainable parameters, while URecJPQ has only 32K. VBPR (He and McAuley (2016)), the multimodal variant of BPR, this decrease is even exacerbated, as the number of trainable parameter decreases from 21M to 170K. 

# 3.3 Summary of URecJPQ 

URecJPQ is an extension of the original RecJPQ applied in a top-k recommenda-tion scenario. While RecJPQ only quantizes item embeddings, URecJPQ extends the This manuscript is currently under peer review.                    

> End-to-end Multimodal Quantization Type
> LightRec ✓XItem Top-k TIGER ✓partially Item Sequential RecJPQ ✓XItem Sequential URecJPQ ✓✓User + Item Top-k

Table 1 : Comparison of our URecJPQ with other quantization approaches, highlight-ing the novelty and the differences of our proposed model with respect to the state of the art. approach by also quantizing user embeddings. This is necessary since top-k recommen-dation requires both user and item ID embeddings, while sequential recommendation only involves item embeddings. In this way, URecJPQ can be applied to any backbone recommendation model, thus replacing user and item tensors in the model design. Given its flexibility, we argue that this paper represents an important contribution to the field, as URecJPQ can be integrated in any recommendation model that leanrs user and item ID embeddings, thus improving their memory efficiency and total num-ber of trainable parameters. Moreover, parameter sharing across users and items also acts as an effective regularization mechanism to reduce overfitting (as shown by Petrov and Macdonald (2024)), and better clusters users and item. We leave the investigation of such aspects for future work. To show its effectiveness, we apply URecJPQ in large-scale and multimodal recommendation scenarios. With respect to the other works in the area, such as LightRec, TIGER, and RecJPQ, our URecJPQ approach enables an end-to-end training of quantized both user and item ID embeddings, rather than only item embeddings (see Table 1). Moreover, it is designed for the traditional top-k recommendation setting, instead of sequential recommendation. Because of these aspects, it can be integrated in any backbone recommendation model, including multimodal, in contrast to TIGER, which only supports uni-modal side information, and LightRec that does not support multi-modality at all. In Table 1 we summarize the comparison between our approach and other relevant works in the field, highlight the novelty and the differences of URecJPQ. 

# 4 Experimental Design 

We conduct our experiments to answer the following research questions: 

• RQ1: How does URecJPQ affect the performance of state-of-the-art multimodal recommendation models? 

• RQ2: How do different number of sub-spaces affect the overall performance? 

• RQ3: How do different code assignment strategies (random, SVD) affect overall performance? 

Datasets. We evaluate our methodology on three datasets, of which two are large-catalog datasets provided with multimodal information. In particular, we use Baby23 This manuscript is currently under peer review.                              

> ML1M Baby 23 Sports 23 Baby 14 Sports 14
> # users 6,040 143,602 338,058 19,445 35,598 # items 2,980 44,340 165,334 7,037 18,287 # interactions 942,703 1,178,208 2,852,781 160,522 295,366 Density 0.94763% 0.9998% 0.9999% 0.9998% 0.9995% Modalities T, V T, V T, V ––

Table 2 : Statistics of the datasets used in our experiments (on the left), compared to previous and smaller versions of the same datasets (on the right). and Sports23 from the Amazon Review 2023 1 datasets provided by Hou et al. (2024). In addition, we consider the MovieLens-1M ( ML1M ) dataset, provided by Spillo et al. (2025). ML1M already has multimodal data, so no additional processing is needed. On the other hand, to process Baby23 and Sports23 these datasets, we follow common approach in the literature, as in Yi et al. (2025, 2022): first, we apply a core-10 

filtering, to keep only users and items with at least 10 interactions. Then we filter out all items for which multimodal information is unavailable. As multimodal information, we use images and textual descriptions, since these are the available modalities in the datasets, but we note that our method can be applied to any number of modalities. We use MiniLM (Wang et al. (2020)) and ViT (Dosovitskiy et al. (2021)) models to encode textual and visual data, respectively. The same encoders have been used for the ML1M, as described in Spillo et al. (2025). The statistics of the post-processed datasets are reported in Table 2. The scripts to download the original datasets and process them are provided in our repository 2,along with the post-processed version used in our experiments, and the source code to reproduce our results. We highlight the scale of the datasets we use: previous versions of these datasets, containing data up to 2014, were considerably smaller as depicted by the right-hand side of the table. Indeed, the 2023 versions represent a significant expansion over the 2014 iterations, containing over nine times the interactions, approx-imately seven times the number of users, and nine times the number of items. This growth in the cardinality shows the large-scale of the datasets we consider. A deeper discussion is provided by Hou et al. (2024). 

Recommendation models. We apply our methodology to four state-of-the-art recommendation models commonly used in collaborative filtering and multimodal rec-ommendation, evaluating them in a top-k recommendation setting. Note that each of these models needs to learn user and item ID embeddings, thus their memory effi-ciency can be improved with our URecJPQ, as previously discussed in Section 3. In particular, we use the following models: 

• BPR (Bayesian Personalized Ranking), proposed by Rendle et al. (2012): a top-k

pairwise ranking model that optimizes personalized recommendations by maximiz-ing the difference in predicted scores between a user’s preferred and non-preferred items. 

> 1https://amazon-reviews-2023.github.io
> 2https://anonymous.4open.science/r/large mmrecjpq-839B/README.md This manuscript is currently under peer review.

• VBPR (Visual Bayesian Personalized Ranking), proposed by He and McAuley (2016): the adaptation of the original BPR model for handling multimodal features, which are concatenated to the item ID embeddings. 

• SLMRec (Self-supervised Learning for Multimedia Recommendation), proposed by Tao et al. (2022): a self-supervised graph learning model that uses the available modalities to generate supervised signals, which are then used as components of a contrastive loss, ultimately aligning the various modality spaces. 

• MMGCL (Multi-Modal Graph Contrastive Learning), proposed by Yi et al. (2022): a self-supervised multi-task graph learning model that performs edge dropout and modality masking to better model user preferences, learning the correlation between different modalities. It uses both a self-supervised and a BPR loss. 

Implementation details. Moreover, to guarantee and simplify the replicability of our study, we implement our methodology within the MMRec released by Zhou (2023) framework, which already provides the implementations of all the aforementioned recommendation models. 

Evaluation protocol. Following the literature in the field (Zhang et al. (2021); Zhou et al. (2023); Yi et al. (2025)), we split our datasets into training, validation and testing data with an 80:10:10 ratio. We evaluate the performance using typical top-

k recommendation metrics, namely Recall@20 and NDCG@20. Moreover, since our focus is to investigate how URecJPQ can be applied in large-scale scenarios, we also use as metrics the checkpoint sizes of the trained models and the number of trainable parameters of each model. As the validation metric, we employ Recall@20 with early stopping after 10 consecutive epochs without improvement, following MMRec as in Zhou (2023). Finally, we apply the Two One-Sided Tests (TOST) to assess whether the quantized models are statistically equivalent to the vanilla models. We set the equivalence margin ϵ = 0 .1, meaning that differences in performances smaller than 0 .1are considered negligible. 

Hyperparameters. We conduct a grid search over the quantization parameters of URecJPQ and the backbone model-specific parameters. In particular, we learn, for the vanilla version of the considered models, full embeddings of sizes k = {64 , 128 , 256 }.Then, we apply the quantization with the codebook length fixed to l = 1, and explore different number of sub-spaces, in the range of m = {8, 16 , 32 , 64 , 128 }, as well as two code assignment strategies, namely, random and SVD . Due to space reasons, we are unable to provide the hyperparameter values specific to the backbone models here. Instead, we direct readers to our aforementioned repository for full details. Notably, we optimized these parameters for both the vanilla and quantized versions of the models. 

System Configuration. The MMRec framework is built on PyTorch. We use version 2.6 along with CUDA driver version 12.4. Our experiments are conducted on a platform equipped with an A5000 GPU and 24 GB of RAM. This manuscript is currently under peer review.    

> (a) Recall on ML1M (b) NDCG on ML1M
> (c) Recall on Baby23 (d) NDCG on Baby23
> (e) Recall on Sports23 (f) NDCG on Sports23

Fig. 4 : Model performance across ML1M, Baby23, and Sports23 datasets. The left column shows Recall@20 and the right column shows NDCG@20. The x-axis (log scale) reports the number of trainable parameters. Blue symbols represent the vanilla (full) models, while green symbols represent their corresponding quantized variants; arrows indicate parameter reduction. Marker size indicates the model checkpoint size. TOST confirms statistical equivalence for all three datasets. This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

# 5 Results Discussion 

# 5.1 RQ1: Performance Analysis 

To answer RQ1, Figure 4 reports the results obtained for the ML1M, Baby23, and Sports23 datasets for both the Recall and NDCG metrics. From the figures, we observe for all three datasets a marked decrease in terms of the trainable parameter counts. On Sports23 and Baby23, these counts decrease by three orders of magnitude, from 10 8 when no quantization is applied to 10 5 when URecJPQ is applied. On ML1M, this decrease is less pronounced, but this is due to the lower number of users and items in the datasets (see Table 2). Regarding the checkpoint sizes, depicted by the size of the points, we also observe a dramatic decrease: for example, the checkpoint size of VBPR on Baby23 is 325 MB, which decreases to 14 MB when URecJPQ is applied. Similarly, the MMGCL checkpoint size is almost 500 MB, while its quantized variant is only 15 MB. In relation to recommendation performance, for the Baby23 dataset (Figures 4c and 4d), we observe that MMGCL and SLMRec perform slightly better than their quantized counterparts. In contrast, applying URecJPQ to BPR and VBPR leads to an improvement in Recall and NDCG. Moreover, URecJPQ-MMGCL outperforms its vanilla version in terms of NDCG. Similar findings can be observed for the Sports23 dataset (Figures 4e and 4f). Interestingly, in this case, VBPR achieves a lower Recall than its quantized counterpart, while the other models all slightly outperform their quantized versions. A similar trend is observed for NDCG. Finally, on ML1M, we observe improved performance for all models and all met-rics (1 exception: Recall for SLMRec). This is likely due to the fact that URecJPQ can act as a regularization mechanism to prevent overfitting, as observed in Petrov and Macdonald (2024). A qualitative analysis based on the plot of the resulting embeddings, reported in Section 6, further confirms this observation. Conversely, on Sports23 (Figures 4e and 4f), as we already observed, performance slightly declines, except for quantized VBPR. We hypothesize an inverse linear relationship between dataset sparsity and performance gains: while compression regularizes denser datasets (ML1M, Baby23), it bottlenecks scarce CF signals as sparsity increases, causing the degradations seen on Sports23. To conclude for RQ1, we observe that the quantized models exhibit better per-formance in the best case, and only a marginal decrease in performance—averaging 8.5% in Recall and 16% in NDCG—in the worst cases, while achieving substantial reductions in checkpoint sizes and the number of trainable parameters, by up to 98% and 99%, respectively. These results show how URecJPQ can support the deployment of industrial RSs, where recommendations must be provided to a massive number of users. 

# 5.2 RQ2: Sub-spaces Number Sensitivity 

To answer RQ2, Figure 5 reports how different numbers of sub-spaces m affect recom-mendation performance. We focus on Recall, though similar findings were observed for This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

> (a) ML1M
> (b) Baby23
> (c) Sports23

Fig. 5 : Impact of number of sub-spaces on Recall across the different datasets. This manuscript is currently under peer review.                                 

> Model ML1M Baby23 Sports23 Random SVD Random SVD Random SVD BPR 0.2499 0.1147 0.0104 0.0056 0.0047 0.0019 VBPR 0.1629 0.2394 0.0108 0.0061 0.0046 0.0017 MMGCL 0.1961 0.2365 0.0108 0.0094 0.0048 0.0051
> SLMRec 0.2031 0.2512 0.0073 0.0087 0.0042 0.0049

Table 3 : Impact of code assignment strategy on performance (Recall@20). NDCG. For these plots, we consider the best performance obtained by the quantized models for each number of sub-spaces. We observe that quantizing with m = 32 sub-spaces achieves the best results on ML1M, which is a small and dense dataset. The only exception is BPR, for which the best-performing number of sub-spaces is m = 64. On the other hand, when moving to much larger and sparser datasets, performance generally increases with the number of sub-spaces, peaking at m = 64 before beginning to decrease. The only exceptions to this behavior are SLMRec, which drops earlier on Baby23 and shows a less monotonic trend on Sports23, and MMGCL on Sports23, which reaches its peak performance at 

m = 128 sub-spaces. To conclude for RQ2, we observe that quantizing the embeddings using m = 32 sub-spaces for smaller datasets and m = 64 sub-spaces for sparser datasets leads to the best performance in terms of Recall among the configurations considered. 

# 5.3 RQ3: Code Assignment Strategy Sensitivity 

To address RQ3, Table 3 reports the impact of random and SVD-based code-assignment strategies on performance in terms of Recall@20. For each dataset and model, we report the best result achieved under each strategy. First, a paired TOST on per-user Recall@20, with an equivalence bound of 

ϵ = 0 .1, indicates that the two strategies are statistically equivalent within this margin (p < 0.05). Nevertheless, consistent numerical differences emerge across datasets and models, suggesting that the choice of code-assignment strategy influences model behav-ior even when differences are not statistically significant under the chosen equivalence threshold. On the small and dense ML1M dataset, SVD-based code assignment consistently provides higher Recall@20 for all multimodal models (VBPR, MMGCL, and SLM-Rec), whereas the pure collaborative filtering model, BPR, benefits substantially from the random strategy. This highlights a clear interaction between model complexity and code assignment in low-sparsity settings. When moving to larger and sparser datasets, the relative effectiveness of the two strategies changes. On Baby23, the random strat-egy achieves higher Recall in three out of four cases, while on Sports23 it performs best for two out of four models. In these settings, BPR and VBPR exhibit a higher sensitivity to the choice of code assignment, showing large performance gaps between random and SVD strategies. Notably, on Sports23, the SVD strategy is consistently suboptimal for both BPR and VBPR. This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

This behavior can be attributed to the combination of model simplicity and dataset sparsity. BPR and VBPR primarily rely on learning user and item ID embeddings (augmented with multimodal features in the case of VBPR). Replacing full embeddings with quantized representations substantially reduces model capacity. Under these con-ditions, SVD-based sub-ID assignments may fail to encode sufficiently informative user–item relationships, especially in sparse datasets, introducing noise that degrades performance. In contrast, random sub-ID assignments promote greater diversity in the learned representations, which appears beneficial for these simpler models. For more complex architectures such as SLMRec and MMGCL, which perform higher-order modeling of interactions and multimodal signals, the impact of the code-assignment strategy is less pronounced. As shown in Table 3, these models often exhibit smaller performance gaps between random and SVD assignments; in some cases, the SVD strategy yields better results, as observed for SLMRec on both Baby23 and Sports23 and for MMGCL on Sports23. Finally, it is worth noting that Sports23 is considerably sparser than Baby23 (Table 2). While this increased sparsity negatively affects SVD-based assignments for simpler models, it does not prevent more expressive models from benefiting from struc-tured sub-ID assignments. A deeper investigation into how dataset sparsity interacts with model complexity and code-assignment strategies is left for future work. To conclude regarding RQ3, we observe that the code-assignment strategy is a rel-evant factor in determining model effectiveness, with its impact strongly dependent on both model complexity and dataset characteristics. Random code assignment gen-erally favors simpler models, such as BPR and VBPR, especially on larger and sparser datasets where it leads to significantly higher Recall. In contrast, more complex mod-els, SLMRec and MMGCL, are less sensitive to the choice of strategy and can benefit from structured SVD-based assignments, even under high sparsity. Overall, while the two strategies are statistically equivalent within the chosen equivalence margin, the consistent numerical trends in Table 3 highlight meaningful interactions between code assignment, model architecture, and data sparsity. 

# 5.4 Summary 

Overall, our experimental evaluation of URecJPQ across different datasets and backbone models reveals three key insights. First, regarding RQ1 , we demonstrate that URecJPQ achieves a dramatic reduc-tion in both the number of trainable parameters (up to 99%) and checkpoint sizes (up to 98%) while maintaining comparable recommendation quality. In dense settings such as ML1M, the quantization framework acts as an effective regularization mechanism that often improves performance over vanilla counterparts, whereas in highly sparse settings like Sports23, we observe a slight performance trade-off due to the bottle-necking of scarce collaborative filtering signals. The regularization mechanism is also confirmed by a qualitative analysis conducted and discussed in Section 6. Second, answering RQ2 , we find that the optimal number of sub-spaces m is closely tied to dataset scale and density. Specifically, m = 32 sub-spaces yield the best results for smaller, dense catalogs, while m = 64 provides the necessary granularity for larger This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

Fig. 6 : PCA applied to user and item embeddings learned by BPR and VBPR, for both vanilla models (on the left) and quantized models (on the right). Yellow scatters represent users, while blue scatters represent items. and sparser scenarios, with performance typically declining beyond these points due to over-segmentation of the latent space. Finally, for RQ3 , we observe that the effectiveness of the code-assignment strategy is highly dependent on model complexity and architecture. Random assignment gen-erally favors simpler, ID-heavy models like BPR and VBPR—particularly in sparse datasets where it promotes representation diversity—whereas structured SVD-based assignments are better suited for complex, multimodal architectures like SLMRec and MMGCL that can leverage higher-order interaction modeling. To conclude, these results validate URecJPQ as a robust and memory-efficient solution for large-scale and multimodal recommendation, enabling the deployment of state-of-the-art models in industrial, memory-constrained environments. This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

# 6 Qualitative Analysis 

To further assess understand the impact of the quantization performed by URecJPQ on the latent space, we perform a qualitative analysis by visualizing the user and item embeddings. Specifically, we apply Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the user and item embeddings to a 2D space for both the vanilla and quantized versions of BPR and VBPR, on the Baby23 dataset 3. To this aim, in the case of quantized models, we first reconstruct the full embeddings by concatenating the sub-embeddings, then we apply the PCA. Through this process, each embedding is represented as a scatter in a 2D space. Specifically, user embeddings are represented as yellow scatters, while item embeddings are represented as blue scatters. The PCA plots are provided in Figure 6, which reveal several key insights into the behavior of URecJPQ. The vanilla BPR and VBPR models exhibit a wide, crescent-shaped distribution. In contrast, the embeddings reconstructed from URecJPQ are significantly more com-pact and centered around the origin. This visual density confirms that the shared sub-embedding mechanism acts as a powerful regularization tool, preventing the model from assigning excessive importance to unique IDs that may lead to overfitting. More-over, across the quantized plots, user embeddings (in yellow) appear more concentrated than item embeddings (in blue). This concentration suggests that URecJPQ effec-tively clusters users with similar interaction patterns into a shared latent core, which is particularly beneficial in the large-scale Baby23 scenario where CF signals can be scarce. As for the performance, we already discussed that vanilla BPR and VBPR con-sistently perform worse than their quantized counterparts. The visual compactness of the quantized models correlates with the observed performance improvements, con-firming that the bottleneck created by Joint Product Quantization helps the model capture global interaction signals more effectively than unconstrained embeddings. To provide a quantitative perspective on the latent space structure, we compute the average intra-subspace distances for the learned sub-embeddings. For the BPR model, the average distance between user sub-embeddings is significantly lower than that for items (0 .16 vs. 0 .41), a trend that persists in the VBPR model (0 .15 vs. 0.32). The smaller distances for users indicate a high degree of parameter sharing and clustering, which reinforces the hypothesis that URecJPQ acts as a robust regulariza-tion mechanism. By constraining users to a more compact region of the latent space, the model effectively mitigates overfitting, leading to the better performance observed in the Baby23 dataset compared to unconstrained vanilla models. Furthermore, the reduction in item sub-embedding distances in VBPR compared to BPR (0 .32 vs. 0 .41) suggests that the integration of multimodal features provides a stronger external signal for item alignment, allowing the ID-based sub-embeddings to be even more compact, leading to better recommendation performance. These plots confirm that URecJPQ does not merely compress the model but actively optimizes the representation space, leading to more robust recommendations in industrial-scale settings. 

> 3Due to space reasons, we limit our discussion on these two models, as VBPR is the multimodal extension of BPR, thus the comparison is more direct. This manuscript is currently under peer review.

# 7 Conclusions 

In this paper, we proposed URecJPQ, an extension of RecJPQ to the top-k rec-ommendation task. The experiments conducted in a large-scale and multimodal recommendation setting showed that URecJPQ is an effective solution for dramati-cally reducing the number of trainable parameters (with reductions of up to 98%), while incurring only marginal performance drops (8.5% on average), or even sta-tistically equivalent improvements when considering the BPR, VBPR and MMGCL models. A qualitative analysis confirmed that the quantization approach effectively acts as a regularization mechanism, preventing overfitting without losing recommen-dation accuracy. This supports the potential impact of our methodology in industrial large-scale scenarios, where our quantization approach can offer significant practical benefits, allowing training recommendation models on even larger datasets. In future work, we plan to explore additional recommendation models, (e.g., graph-based models, such as LATTICE (Zhou and Shen (2023)) and FREEDOM (Zhang et al. (2021))), and other datasets to further generalize our findings. Furthermore, we plan to investigate strategies to also compress multimodal embeddings. Finally, we plan to investigate the quantization impact on beyond-accuracy aspects of recommendation models, including fairness, novelty and diversity of the recommendation lists, as well as the overall energy efficiency during training. 

# Funding 

Not applicable. 

# Acknowledgement 

Not applicable. 

# References 

Babenko A, Lempitsky V (2014) Additive quantization for extreme vector compres-sion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 931–938 Dosovitskiy A, Beyer L, Kolesnikov A, et al (2021) An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929 Gray R (1984) Vector quantization. IEEE Assp Magazine 1(2):4–29 Hansen PC (1987) The truncated svd as a method for regularization. BIT Numerical Mathematics 27:534–553 He R, McAuley J (2016) Vbpr: visual bayesian personalized ranking from implicit feedback. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

He X, Liao L, Zhang H, et al (2017) Neural collaborative filtering. In: Proceedings of the 26th international conference on world wide web, pp 173–182 Hidasi B, Karatzoglou A, Baltrunas L, et al (2015) Session-based recommendations with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:151106939 Hou Y, Li J, He Z, et al (2024) Bridging language and items for retrieval and recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:240303952 Huang PS, He X, Gao J, et al (2013) Learning deep structured semantic models for web search using clickthrough data. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp 2333–2338 Jegou H, Douze M, Schmid C (2010) Product quantization for nearest neighbor search. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 33(1):117–128 Lian D, Wang H, Liu Z, et al (2020) Lightrec: A memory and search-efficient recommender system. In: Proceedings of the web conference 2020, pp 695–705 Mallamaci C, Petrov AV, Mancino ACM, et al (2025) Balancing accuracy and novelty with sub-item popularity. arXiv preprint arXiv:250805198 Petrov AV, Macdonald C (2024) Recjpq: training large-catalogue sequential recom-menders. In: Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp 538–547 Rajput S, Mehta N, Singh A, et al (2023) Recommender systems with generative retrieval. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36:10299–10315 Rendle S, Freudenthaler C, Gantner Z, et al (2012) Bpr: Bayesian personalized ranking from implicit feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:12052618 Resnick P, Varian HR (1997) Recommender systems. Communications of the ACM 40(3):56–58 Schafer JB, Frankowski D, Herlocker J, et al (2007) Collaborative filtering recom-mender systems. In: The adaptive web: methods and strategies of web personaliza-tion. Springer, p 291–324 Spillo G, Musacchio E, Musto C, et al (2025) See the movie, hear the song, read the book: Extending movielens-1m, last. fm-2k, and dbbook with multimodal data. In: Proceedings of the Nineteenth ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, pp 847–856 Sun F, Liu J, Wu J, et al (2019) Bert4rec: Sequential recommendation with bidirec-tional encoder representations from transformer. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on information and knowledge management, pp 1441–1450 This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

Tao Z, Liu X, Xia Y, et al (2022) Self-supervised learning for multimedia recommen-dation. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 25:5107–5116 Tay Y, Tran V, Dehghani M, et al (2022) Transformer memory as a differentiable search index. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35:21831–21843 Wang W, Wei F, Dong L, et al (2020) Minilm: Deep self-attention distillation for task-agnostic compression of pre-trained transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33:5776–5788 Xue HJ, Dai X, Zhang J, et al (2017) Deep matrix factorization models for recommender systems. In: IJCAI, Melbourne, Australia, pp 3203–3209 Yi Z, Wang X, Ounis I, et al (2022) Multi-modal graph contrastive learning for micro-video recommendation. In: Proceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp 1807–1811 Yi Z, Long Z, Ounis I, et al (2025) Enhancing recommender systems: Deep modality alignment with large multi-modal encoders. ACM Transactions on Recommender Systems 3(4):1–25 Yuan Z, Yuan F, Song Y, et al (2023) Where to go next for recommender systems? id-vs. modality-based recommender models revisited. In: Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp 2639–2649 Zeghidour N, Luebs A, Omran A, et al (2021) Soundstream: An end-to-end neural audio codec. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing 30:495–507 Zhan J, Mao J, Liu Y, et al (2021) Jointly optimizing query encoder and product quantization to improve retrieval performance. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp 2487–2496 Zhang J, Zhu Y, Liu Q, et al (2021) Mining latent structures for multimedia recommen-dation. In: Proceedings of the 29th ACM international conference on multimedia, pp 3872–3880 Zhang S, Ma X, Wang Y, et al (2022) An embedding and interactions learn-ing approach for id feature in deep recommender system. Expert Systems with Applications 210:118425 Zhou H, Zhou X, Zeng Z, et al (2023) A comprehensive survey on multimodal rec-ommender systems: Taxonomy, evaluation, and future directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:230204473 This manuscript is currently under peer review. 

Zhou X (2023) Mmrec: Simplifying multimodal recommendation. In: Proceedings of the 5th ACM International Conference on Multimedia in Asia Workshops, pp 1–2 Zhou X, Shen Z (2023) A tale of two graphs: Freezing and denoising graph structures for multimodal recommendation. In: Proceedings of the 31st ACM international conference on multimedia, pp 935–943