Title: Privacy-Robust Incrementality Measurement for Advertising Systems under Signal Loss

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.03878v1

Published Time: Wed, 03 Jun 2026 01:28:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# Privacy-Robust Incrementality Measurement for Advertising Systems under Signal Loss 

Prashant Shekhar 1 and Caroline Howard 

Department of Mathematics Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University Daytona Beach, FL, USA 

Abstract 

Advertising platforms use randomized lift tests to measure incrementality, but privacy-preserving reporting systems degrade the observed signal through match-rate loss, linkability loss, attribution-window loss, aggregation-threshold suppression, randomized reporting noise, and segment-heterogeneous signal loss. This paper formulates privacy-constrained advertising measurement as a robust causal decision problem under the mentioned signal losses. Given a randomized experiment and an ambiguity set for privacy-induced degradation, the framework projects the observation-compatible fiber of clean/unfiltered experimental worlds onto the incrementality functional and returns certified, rejected, and unresolved decisions. The main result gives a sharp decision frontier. Reports outside the frontier support uniformly valid certification or rejection, whereas reports inside it contain too little information for any method to uniformly distinguish above-threshold incrementality from non-incrementality. Supporting results give finite-sample certification, sample-complexity guarantees, a minimax lower bound showing that signal loss reduces effective information, and a reporting-granularity tradeoff. On 2.0M Criteo Uplift rows and the 64K-row Hillstrom email experiment, clean conversion lift is positive in both datasets, with lifts 0.00112 and 0.00495 , respectively. Population certification survives mild degradation in Criteo and severe degradation in Hillstrom, while all considered finite-sample stress settings in both datasets remain unresolved after simultaneous uncertainty and reporting noise are included. At the segment level, Hillstrom population certification falls from 100% of coarse cells to 36 .0% of very fine cells, while aggregation-threshold suppression rises to 39 .5% . Overall, the research contributes a decision-theoretic layer for privacy-aware incrementality measurement whose output is the strongest causal-claim justified by degraded ads signals. 

# 1 Introduction 

Incrementality measurement asks whether advertising caused outcomes that would not otherwise have occurred. This question is central to ads ranking, advertiser reporting, campaign optimization, budget allocation, and product experimentation. The clean statistical solution is a randomized experiment with well-defined treatment, control, outcomes, and follow-up windows. In practice, however, advertising measurement is increasingly shaped by privacy and identity constraints. Users may opt out of tracking, device identifiers may be missing or unstable, conversions may be reported only in aggregate, small cells may be suppressed, and privacy-preserving systems may add randomized reporting noise before reporting conversion counts. The result is a gap between the causal estimand that the experiment was designed to identify and the degraded signal available to the analyst. This paper studies that gap. We formulate privacy-constrained advertising measurement as a robust causal deci-sion problem under signal loss. The starting point is a randomized incrementality experiment with a treatment indicator, outcome labels, and covariates. We assume the measurement system releases a degraded version of this experiment through 6 signal-loss layers: (i) match-rate loss drops reportable outcomes, (ii) linkability loss breaks identity continuity across events, (iii) attribution-window loss censors conversions outside reporting   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

1

> arXiv:2606.03878v1 [stat.ML] 2 Jun 2026

Figure 1: Privacy-robust incrementality measurement as a decision problem. A randomized advertising experiment identifies clean lift before reporting constraints are applied (as summarized in Table 1). The proposed framework maps the resulting privacy-degraded report to a decision/certification frontier and returns the strongest justified decision: (i) certify positive incrementality, (ii) reject it, or (iii) mark the claim unresolved. 

windows, (iv) aggregation-threshold suppression removes sparse reporting cells, (v) randomized reporting noise perturbs released aggregates, and (vi) segment-heterogeneous signal loss makes these degradations vary across customer or campaign groups. These layers correspond to common primitives in modern reporting systems, including event-level attribution reports, summary reports, aggregation services, attribution windows, contribution budgets, and interoperable private-attribution protocols [Google Privacy Sandbox, 2025a,b, Case et al., 2023, Aksu et al., 2024, Tholoniat et al., 2024]. Figure 1 summarizes the resulting decision problem. The analyst observes the degraded report and must decide whether the evidence is strong enough to certify positive incrementality. The key distinction is between estimating lift and certifying a decision. A point estimate can be optimistic when high-value conversions are more likely to be unobserved, when low-volume segments are suppressed, or when randomized reporting noise dominates the signal. A deployable measurement system should therefore state what remains justified under plausible signal-loss mechanisms. We propose a framework that maps an observed privacy-degraded experiment into three sets. The first contains campaigns or segments whose lower-bound incremental value exceeds the business threshold. The second contains cases whose upper bound is below the threshold. The third contains unresolved cases where the available signal cannot support a stronger claim. In essence, the paper is motivated by four observations from advertising measurement practice. First, random-ized incrementality data remain the strongest empirical anchor for causal claims, while missing measurement remains a separate obstacle. Second, privacy degradation changes which causal claims are identifiable, so it belongs inside the decision rule. Third, public datasets rarely include both the pre-privacy identity graph and post-privacy reports, so empirical work must be honest about what is actually observed. And fourth, business decisions require conservative certification, beyond ranking or attribution alone.   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

2Overall, the research contributions are fivefold. First , we define a signal-loss model for privacy-constrained ads measurement that covers match-rate loss, linkability loss, attribution-window loss, aggregation-threshold suppression, randomized reporting noise, and segment-heterogeneous signal loss. Second , we introduce a compatibility-fiber view of privacy-degraded reports and specialize sharp partial-identification bands to privacy-constrained incrementality decisions over conversions and spend. Third , we show that the unresolved region is information-theoretic in the sense that if the business threshold lies inside the sharp band, no uniformly valid procedure observing the same degraded report can certify or reject the claim. Fourth , we prove sample-complexity and minimax lower-bound results that separate sampling error, reporting-noise error, and irreducible signal-loss width, with finite-sample certification handled as the direct simultaneous-coverage decision rule. And fifth , we define reporting-granularity diagnostics that trade off randomized reporting-noise reduction against segment-heterogeneous signal loss and make segment-level unresolved claims visible. 

# 2 Related Work 

Incrementality, uplift modeling, and treatment targeting : Uplift modeling studies how to predict het-erogeneous treatment effects and target treatment to units whose outcomes are most improved by treatment [Gutierrez and Gérardy, 2017, Guelman et al., 2015, Ruda´ s and Jaroszewicz, 2018, Olaya et al., 2020]. The Criteo uplift benchmarks made large-scale randomized advertising data available for uplift modeling and individual-treatment-effect prediction [Diemert et al., 2018, 2021]. Recent work studies area under the uplift curve (AUUC) optimization and generalization guarantees for treatment targeting [Betlei et al., 2020]. Our work asks a complementary measurement question: whether an observed randomized lift signal remains decision-certifying after privacy and identity degradation. 

Advertising measurement and attribution : Large field experiments have shown that observational and model-based advertising measurement can differ substantially from randomized lift estimates [Gordon et al., 2019, 2023, Johnson, 2023]. Related work studies ghost ads, geo experiments, causal impact, incremental return on ad spend, latent stratification, counterfactual demand-side platform (DSP) measurement, Facebook lift-study power calculations, and experiment-to-campaign prediction [Johnson et al., 2017, Lewis and Rao, 2015, Vaver and Koehler, 2011, Chen and Au, 2022, Brodersen et al., 2015, Berman and Feit, 2024, Chalasani et al., 2017, Sun et al., 2015, Liu et al., 2018, Gordon et al., 2026]. Attribution models and multi-touch attribution attempt to assign conversion credit across touchpoints, including causal and recurrent approaches [Diemert et al., 2017, Du et al., 2019, Yao et al., 2022]. Our framework differs in its decision target. Attribution distributes credit, while privacy-robust incrementality asks what causal decision remains certified when reporting signals are degraded. 

Privacy-preserving measurement and signal loss : Differential privacy provides formal protection against individual-level disclosure [Dwork, 2008, Dwork and Roth, 2014]. Recent advertising-measurement work studies private conversion measurement, Attribution Reporting and Private Aggregation in Privacy Sandbox, Interoperable Private Attribution (IPA), summary-report optimization, on-device budgeting for differentially private ad measurement, aggregated event measurement, and privacy-preserving conversion prediction [Delaney et al., 2024, Google Privacy Sandbox, 2025a,b, Case et al., 2023, Aksu et al., 2024, Ghazi et al., 2025, Tholoniat et al., 2024, Meta Audience Network, 2021, Xiao et al., 2025, Zhong et al., 2022, O’Brien et al., 2022]. These papers focus on privacy protocols, query release, and reporting accuracy. We focus on the causal decision layer downstream of such mechanisms. Given degraded or private reports from a randomized incrementality test, when is positive incrementality still certifiable? 

Partial identification, sensitivity, and robust decision rules : When data are incomplete or assumptions are weak, causal effects may be partially identified rather than point identified [Horowitz and Manski, 2000, Imbens and Manski, 2004, Manski and Pepper, 2000, Richardson et al., 2014, Coppock et al., 2017, Gabriel et al., 2023]. Recent work also studies causal inference with corrupted data and differentially private average treatment effect (ATE) or conditional average treatment effect (CATE) estimation [Agarwal and Singh, 2021, Ohnishi and Awan, 2025, Niu et al., 2022]. Robust policy and off-policy evaluation methods emphasize decision rules that remain valid under confounding, weak support, or high-variance logged feedback [Kallus and Zhou, 2018, Swaminathan and Joachims, 2015, Su et al., 2020]. Recent advertising-marketplace work applies a similar   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

3decision-object perspective to adjacent problems, including mechanism-robust online experiment design under interference [Shekhar and Howard, 2026a] and support-aware offline reserve-policy selection from logged auctions [Shekhar and Howard, 2026b]. This paper builds on those ideas by developing a privacy-degraded incrementality decision frontier , which is a specialization of sharp partial-identification logic to advertising reports whose signal-loss layers determine whether a lift claim is certifiable, rejectable, or impossible to resolve, together with finite-sample and information-theoretic limits for that frontier. 

# 3 Problem Setup 

We observe a randomized marketing experiment with treatment assignment Ai ∈ { 0, 1}, outcome Yi, and reported segment membership i ∈ s. The outcome may represent conversion, visit, spend, or advertiser value. Let Yi(1) and Yi(0) denote potential outcomes. For a segment s, the clean incrementality estimand is 

∆s = E[Yi(1) − Yi(0) | i ∈ s] . (1) Randomization identifies this estimand under clean observation. The measurement problem is that the analyst may not observe the clean arm means needed to estimate ∆s. Instead, the reporting system releases a privacy-degraded segment report rs. In the simplest mean-reporting case, rs contains degraded treated and control arm means eμ1,s , eμ0,s , together with cell counts, suppression indicators, and any reporting-noise metadata. The degraded arm mean is related to the clean arm mean by a reportable-retention multiplier 

eμa,s = qa,s μa,s , μa,s = E[Yi(a) | i ∈ s], a ∈ { 0, 1}.

The multiplier qa,s ∈ (0 , 1] summarizes the share of outcome signal that remains matchable, attributable, and linkable to arm a in segment s. Later sections allow qa,s to vary over an ambiguity set rather than assuming it is exactly known. Privacy-preserving reports may also suppress small cells or add randomized reporting noise. A generic released cell total has the form eSs = 1{Ns ≥ m} (Ns eμs + ξs) ,

where Ns is the reported cell count, m is an aggregation threshold, and ξs is randomized reporting noise. This notation is only meant to make the reporting layer concrete. The rest of the paper works directly with the released report rs, the degraded arm means it implies, and the set of clean experimental worlds that remain compatible with that report. The decision problem is to determine whether the clean incrementality value ∆s remains certified after signal loss. Let bs ≥ 0 denote a business threshold for meaningful incremental value. A valid measurement procedure should certify segment s only when the degraded report supports ∆s > b s uniformly over plausible signal-loss mechanisms. 

# 4 Signal-Loss Ambiguity Sets 

We describe privacy and identity degradation through an ambiguity set U. Each element u ∈ U specifies a plau-sible signal-loss mechanism. A mechanism may include treatment-specific match-rate loss, segment-specific match-rate loss, linkability loss, attribution-window loss, aggregation-threshold suppression, randomized reporting noise, and segment-heterogeneous signal loss. We write 

u = ( πa,s , κ s, ρ a,s , m, σ ξ , η s), (2) where πa,s is the match probability for treatment arm a in segment s, κs controls linkability loss, ρa,s is attribution-window retention, m is the aggregation threshold, σξ is the randomized reporting-noise scale, and 

ηs captures segment-heterogeneous signal loss. The ambiguity set can be specified from product knowledge, data quality diagnostics, privacy-system doc-umentation, or stress-test ranges. In a deployed ads setting, these ranges should be read from the reporting   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

4Table 1: Mapping the paper’s signal-loss layers to deployed ads-reporting primitives and model components. Here qa,s is the reportable-retention multiplier defined in (6). The empirical stress layers are simplified, auditable instantiations of these primitives over public randomized datasets, not proprietary production API traces. Signal-loss layer Examples in modern systems Model component Match-rate loss Missing outcome matches, opt-outs, unmatched conversions                 

> πa,s ,qa,s
> Linkability loss Browser, device, or identity fragmen-tation across events
> κs,qa,s
> Attribution-window loss Event-level report windows, delayed or windowed conversion attribution
> ρa,s ,qa,s
> Aggregation-threshold suppres-sion Summary reports, conversion-key ag-gregates, minimum aggregation sizes
> m, unresolved cells Randomized reporting noise Aggregation-service noise, private summary release, noisy aggregate measurement
> ξg,σξ
> Segment-heterogeneous signal loss Segment-specific reporting quality, trigger coarsening, prioritized events
> ηs, segment-specific Us

contract whenever possible. Attribution Reporting and IPA-style systems expose a small number of operational primitives such as whether reports are event-level or aggregate, which attribution windows are active, which keys define summary reports, which small cells are suppressed or clipped, and what randomized reporting noise or contribution budget is applied. Table 1 gives the mapping used in this paper. For example, 

πa,s ∈ [πs, π s], ρa,s ∈ [ρs, ρ s], σξ ∈ [0 , σ ξ ],

with monotonicity or symmetry restrictions when justified. The analyst states the range of signal-loss mechanisms under which the decision claim should remain valid, and the framework certifies only claims that hold across that range. This mapping is the link between the theoretical ambiguity set and real ads privacy systems. A Privacy Sandbox summary report, for instance, naturally determines a reporting partition, an aggregation threshold or contribution constraint, and a noise scale for ξg . Event-level reporting determines attribution windows and coarsened trigger values, which enter through attribution-window loss and segment-heterogeneous signal loss. IPA-style protocols similarly return aggregate, purpose-limited measurements rather than row-level conversion labels, so their output is naturally represented as a released report rs with an associated compatibility fiber. The paper’s experiments use simplified, auditable stress layers as reproducible approximations to vendor-specific implementation traces. They test whether incrementality decisions survive the signal losses that these systems impose. 

Assumption 1 (Randomization and bounded outcomes) . Treatment is randomized with known assignment probabilities bounded away from zero and one. Outcomes satisfy Yi(a) ∈ [0 , B ] for a ∈ { 0, 1}.

Assumption 2 (Signal-loss ambiguity) . The unknown measurement mechanism belongs to a known ambiguity set U. For each u ∈ U , the mechanism specifies loss parameters (defined in (2)) that determine the distribution of the observed report conditional on the clean randomized experiment. 

Compatibility fibers : The information geometry of the problem is captured by the set of clean experimental worlds that remain compatible with the released report. Let rs denote the privacy-degraded report for segment 

s, including observed treated and control summaries, reporting thresholds, and randomized reporting-noise metadata. For a clean world ηs, which contains the clean arm means and any latent match or attribution quantities needed to define the estimand, write Tu(ηs) for the report that would be released under signal-loss mechanism u. The compatibility fiber is 

Fs(rs; U) = {ηs : there exists u ∈ U such that Tu(ηs) is compatible with rs}. (3)   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

5The word “compatible” means exact equality for deterministic degraded reports and membership in a high-probability confidence region when randomized reporting noise is present. The sharp population question is therefore geometric, asking to project the fiber Fs(rs; U) onto the incrementality functional ∆s(ηs). If the projection lies entirely above the business threshold, the claim is certifiable. If it lies entirely below the threshold, the claim is rejectable. If it crosses the threshold, the released report has not preserved enough information to support either conclusion. 

# 5 Certified Incrementality Bounds 

5.1 From compatibility fibers to business decisions 

Let ∆s(ηs) denote the clean incrementality value in segment s for a clean world ηs. The sharp population bounds induced by a released report rs are 

ℓ⋆s (rs; U) = inf  

> ηs∈F s(rs;U)

∆s(ηs), u⋆s (rs; U) = sup 

> ηs∈F s(rs;U)

∆s(ηs). (4) These are identification limits caused by signal loss, with sampling uncertainty added later. Let LB s(α; U) and 

UB s(α; U) denote finite-sample lower and upper outer bounds for the clean incrementality value in segment s,constructed so that they contain the sharp population fiber projection with probability at least 1 − α. Their concrete plug-in form is given in Eq. (8) later. The operational decision rule is 

Decision( s) = 



Certify , LB s(α; U) > b s,

Reject , UB s(α; U) ≤ bs,

Unresolved , otherwise. (5) This rule deliberately treats unresolved cases as a valid output. If privacy degradation destroys too much information relative to the business threshold bs, the correct conclusion is a weaker decision claim. This decision rule is the practitioner-facing version of the information geometry. The analyst asks what can be certified for all mechanisms in U, without first selecting a single true signal-loss mechanism. The sharpness of this logic is given by the certification-frontier in Theorem 5.1, and the general fiber-projection result in Lemma B.1 in the appendix; the finite-sample validity of the rule is formalized afterward. 

5.2 Sharp match and attribution-loss frontier 

The fiber projection becomes closed form for the most common ads measurement failure mode. Suppose outcomes are nonnegative and bounded by B. In segment s, let the observed treated and control means be 

eμ1s and eμ0s. Let qa,s denote the combined reportable-retention multiplier in arm a, collecting match-rate loss, attribution-window loss, and linkability loss when these channels are not separately identifiable. In this subsection qa,s is an outcome-signal multiplier satisfying eμa,s = qa,s μa,s . It captures retained outcome signal after reporting loss, while a raw user match rate captures only one possible source of that retention. In the simplest match-attribution case, 

qa,s = πa,s ρa,s κs ∈ [qa,s , q a,s ], 0 < q a,s ≤ qa,s ≤ 1. (6) For nonnegative outcomes, the clean arm mean μa,s = E[Yi(a) | i ∈ s] must satisfy 

eμa,s 

qa,s 

≤ μa,s ≤ min 

(

B, eμa,s 

qa,s 

)

.

The resulting population signal-loss band is 

ℓs(U) = eμ1s

q1,s 

− min 

(

B, eμ0s

q0,s 

)

, us(U) = min 

(

B, eμ1s

q1,s 

)

− eμ0s

q0,s 

. (7)   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

6The width of this band is a direct measure of privacy-induced information loss. It widens when retention rates are poorly known, when treatment and control retention can differ, or when the observed outcomes are sparse. 

Theorem 5.1 (Sharp privacy-loss certification frontier) . Under the bounded nonnegative outcome model above, with positive retention lower bounds 0 < q a,s ≤ qa,s , Eq. (7) is sharp. For every δ ∈ [ℓs(U), u s(U)] , there exists a clean randomized experiment and a retention mechanism in U that produce the same degraded arm means and satisfy ∆s = δ. Consequently: 1. if ℓs(U) > b s, positive incrementality is certifiable uniformly over U;2. if us(U) ≤ bs, non-incrementality relative to bs is rejectable uniformly over U;3. if ℓs(U) ≤ bs < u s(U), the released report is intrinsically unresolved. More precisely, there exist two clean worlds and two mechanisms in U that induce the same released-report distribution, one with ∆s ≤ bs and one with ∆s > b s. Any binary rule that must decide between certification and non-certification from the released report has worst-case error at least 1/2, and any uniformly valid three-state rule must leave this report unresolved. 

The theorem is the paper’s main identification result. Existing missing-data bounds show that causal effects may be partially identified when outcomes are not fully observed. Here, partial-identification logic becomes a sharp measurement decision frontier for privacy-degraded ads reports. The frontier has both a constructive and an impossibility side. Outside the band, every compatible clean world supports the same decision. Inside the band, the same released report can be generated by clean worlds on opposite sides of the business threshold, so a forced binary decision has worst-case error at least 1/2. The unresolved region is therefore an information-theoretic part of the compatibility fiber, where the degraded report has not preserved enough information to certify or reject the claim. 

5.3 Finite-sample and reporting-noise certification 

Population sharpness is not enough for deployment because reports are finite and may contain randomized reporting noise. We keep the match-attribution relation from the previous subsection, eμa,s = qa,s μa,s with 

qa,s ∈ [qa,s , q a,s ], and replace the population degraded mean by a simultaneous confidence interval. Let 

[eμa,s (α), eμa,s (α)] 

be simultaneous confidence bounds for eμa,s , including bounded-outcome randomization uncertainty and randomized reporting-noise uncertainty. Since smaller retention implies a larger compatible clean mean, the clean arm mean lies in the outer interval 

μa,s ∈

" eμa,s (α)

qa,s 

, min 

(

B, eμa,s (α)

qa,s 

)# 

.

Taking the smallest compatible treated mean minus the largest compatible control mean gives the finite-sample lower bound, and taking the largest compatible treated mean minus the smallest compatible control mean gives the finite-sample upper bound: 

LB s(α; U) = eμ1,s (α)

q1,s 

− min 

(

B, eμ0,s (α)

q0,s 

)

, UB s(α; U) = min 

(

B, eμ1,s (α)

q1,s 

)

− eμ0,s (α)

q0,s 

. (8) The finite-sample guarantee follows directly from simultaneous coverage of the degraded arm means. Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, and the degraded mean intervals used in Eq. (8) have simultaneous coverage at least 1 − α over the reported segment collection. Then, with probability at least 1 − α,

LB s(α; U) ≤ ∆s ≤ UB s(α; U) for all reported segments s.   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

7Consequently, Eq. (5) controls false certification and false rejection simultaneously over all reported segments and all signal-loss mechanisms in U.This is the sampling-theory layer. It says that a certified claim has survived three filters at once: bounded-outcome randomization uncertainty, randomized reporting noise, and worst-case signal loss in U. A rejected claim has failed the same robust test. An unresolved claim is one whose finite-sample, privacy-degraded compatibility interval still crosses the threshold. 

5.4 Sample complexity and privacy utility 

The finite-sample bound also gives a sample-complexity diagnostic. Let qmin = min a,s qa,s . If qmin is small, every observed degraded mean must be rescaled more aggressively to recover a clean mean, so randomization error is amplified. If the retention intervals are wide, there is also an irreducible identification width that more samples cannot remove. 

Proposition 5.2 (Sample complexity under privacy signal loss) . Consider a finite reported segment collection 

C and balanced per-arm sample size ns ≥ n in every segment. Suppose Yi(a) ∈ [0 , B ], qa,s ∈ [qa,s , q a,s ],

qmin = min a,s qa,s > 0, and independent mean-zero randomized reporting noise added to each arm total is sub-Gaussian with variance proxy σ2 

> ξ

. With probability at least 1 − α, all segment effects satisfy 

∆s ∈ [ℓs(U) − Rad n, u s(U) + Rad n] , Rad n = 2Bqmin 

r log(4 |C| /α )2n + 2σξ

qmin n

p2 log(4 |C| /α ). (9) 

Consequently, achieving finite-sample radius Rad n ≤ ε is guaranteed if 

n ≳ max 

(

B2

q2min ε2 log |C| 

α , σξ

qmin ε

r

log |C| 

α

)

. (10) 

The remaining width us(U) − ℓs(U) is an identification cost of signal-loss uncertainty. It persists as n grows unless the ambiguity set U itself tightens. 

The rate in Eq. (10) is the coverage penalty in concrete form. If only half of outcomes are matchable and attributable, the sampling-driven requirement scales by roughly 4. If only one fifth are reliably retained, it scales by roughly 25 . Sample size addresses sampling error, while measurement diagnostics address the population band [ℓs(U), u s(U)] . More impressions shrink Rad n, and better diagnostics tighten the ambiguity set U.

Theorem 5.3 (Minimax lower bound for signal-loss measurement) . Consider one segment with binary conversion value Yi(a) ∈ { 0, B } for a known scale B > 0. Let pa = Pr {Yi(a) = B}, a ∈ { 0, 1}, denote the clean conversion probability in arm a, so the clean incrementality target is ∆ = B(p1 − p0). In each arm, the analyst observes only eYi(a) = Ri(a)Yi(a), where Ri(a) ∼ Bernoulli( q) is independent retention and 

q ∈ (0 , 1] is known. With n observations per arm, every estimator b∆ based only on the degraded observations satisfies 

sup 

> p0,p 1∈[1 /4,3/4]

Ep0,p 1

h b∆ − B(p1 − p0)

i

≥ c B

√qn ,

for a universal constant c > 0, whenever qn is large enough. Consequently, any estimator that attains constant-probability error at most ε uniformly over this class requires n ≥ c′ B2 

> qε 2

for a universal constant 

c′ > 0. If q is not known and only q ∈ [q, q ] is known, then even with infinite data the minimax absolute error is at least B

> 4



1 − qq



.

The theorem explains why the sample-complexity penalty reflects a real loss of information. Retention loss reduces the effective number of observed conversion trials, so the clean-data rate is no longer attainable from the degraded report. In addition, uncertainty about the retention mechanism creates an identification floor   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

8that no estimator can remove from the released report alone. The lower bound is stated for binary conversion outcomes, while Proposition 5.2 gives a conservative sufficient bound for bounded outcomes and noisy reports. Together they give the same planning message. More samples can reduce finite-sample uncertainty, but information omitted by the privacy-degraded report remains unavailable unless the ambiguity set itself is tightened. Aggregation-threshold suppression and randomized reporting noise affect certification through the standard error of released cell means. If a reported cell g has treated and control counts N1g and N0g , and the report adds independent mean-zero noise with variance σ2 

> ξ

to each arm total, a conservative variance proxy for the released treated-control difference is 

bV priv  

> g

= bV rand  

> g

+ σ2

> ξ

1

N 21g

+ 1

N 20g

!

. (11) Here bV rand  

> g

is the usual randomization variance proxy for the clean difference in means, and the second term is the reporting-noise penalty after converting noisy arm totals into noisy arm means. This penalty is small for large cells and severe for small cells, which is why privacy-preserving reports often support aggregate campaign conclusions before they support fine segment-level claims. For a two-arm randomized experiment with assignment-unit variance proxy σ2 

> s

, effective per-arm cell size Ns,and randomized reporting-noise variance σ2 

> ξ

, the corresponding conservative minimum detectable effect is 

MDE priv  

> s

=  z1−α/ 2 + z1−β

 s

2σ2

> s

Ns

+ σ2

> ξ

 1

N 21s

+ 1

N 20s



. (12) The first quantile controls the two-sided type-I error rate α, and the second controls power 1 − β. If the positive population signal-loss margin ℓs(U) − bs is smaller than MDE priv  

> s

, then certification is not expected to be statistically powered at level (α, β ). The MDE formula is therefore a planning diagnostic. It separates cases where the campaign effect is too small from cases where randomized reporting noise, sparse cells, or retention uncertainty make the privacy-degraded report too weak for certification. Appendix Proposition B.2 gives the derivation. 

5.5 Reporting granularity and segment geometry 

Privacy reports are often released over a partition P of users, campaigns, geographies, devices, or time windows. Finer partitions are more interpretable and better aligned with segment safety, while smaller cells increase aggregation-threshold suppression. Coarser partitions reduce randomized reporting noise and missing-cell risk, while larger cells can hide segment-heterogeneous signal loss. This tradeoff can be made explicit. To see the tradeoff mathematically, suppose the segment-level treatment effect function is H-Lipschitz over a segment metric dseg . For any reported cell g ∈ P , define 

diam( g) = sup 

> s,s ′∈g

dseg (s, s ′), ¯∆g = X

> s∈g

ws|g ∆s,

where ¯∆g is the within-cell weighted average effect. The Lipschitz condition implies that every segment s ∈ g

is no more than Hdiam( g) below the cell average. Therefore, if the cell-level robust lower bound satisfies 

¯∆g ≥ LB g (α; U) on the simultaneous coverage event, then every segment s ∈ g satisfies 

∆s ≥ LB g (α; U) − H diam( g).

Thus cell g supports segment-safe certification whenever 

LB g (α; U) − H diam( g) > b g . (13) This calculation gives a practical rule for choosing reporting granularity. A coarse cell has larger Nag , so Eq. (11) is smaller and aggregation-threshold suppression is less likely. The same coarse cell can have larger   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

9diam( g), which increases the heterogeneity penalty Hdiam( g). The empirical implementation estimates this penalty from the data by nesting the finest reporting cells inside each coarser reported cell, computing the treatment-effect dispersion of those finest cells, and using the maximum deviation from the coarser cell’s weighted average as the observed Hdiam( g) proxy. The best reporting partition is determined by the balance between randomized reporting-noise reduction and the segment heterogeneity it averages over. 

5.6 Segment safety under heterogeneous signal loss 

Aggregate incrementality can be certified even when subgroup claims are not. Let C be a collection of segments, such as device types, channels, customer history groups, geography, or advertiser categories. The framework certifies segment safety by requiring 

LB s(α/ |C| ; U) > b s for every s ∈ C 

or by reporting which segments remain unresolved after multiplicity correction. This step is important because signal loss is often heterogeneous. For example, match-rate loss may differ by channel, attribution-window loss may differ by customer history, and aggregation-threshold suppression may disproportionately affect small segments. This segment-safety check is substantive. Appendix B.5 gives a constructive example in which two signal-loss mechanisms induce the same aggregate degraded lift and lead the segment-level rule to certify different segments. The practical warning is that a campaign can appear incrementally positive in aggregate while the evidence is insufficient for one or more segments. The proposed decision object makes this visible by returning unresolved segment claims directly. 

# 6 Robust Incrementality Certification Algorithm 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the proposed method. The algorithm takes randomized experimental data, an ambiguity set of signal-loss mechanisms, reporting thresholds, randomized reporting-noise parameters, and business decision thresholds. It returns three sets indicating certified, rejected, and unresolved cases. In the match-attribution implementation used in the experiments, the worst case over U has the closed form in Eq. (7) ,so match-rate loss, attribution-window loss, and linkability loss enter through the retained-signal interval 

[qa,s , q a,s ].The validity of Algorithm 1 is an immediate consequence of the finite-sample certification logic in Section 5.3. On the simultaneous coverage event for the finite-sample bounds, the algorithm certifies only segments with 

∆s > b s, rejects only segments with ∆s ≤ bs, and leaves the remaining segments unresolved by construction. The operational interpretation is simple. If the ambiguity set is wide, the algorithm returns more unresolved decisions. If the measurement system improves, the ambiguity set tightens and certification becomes easier. 

# 7 Empirical Results 

7.1 Datasets 

The empirical analysis uses two randomized datasets. 

Criteo Uplift : The Criteo dataset contains anonymized covariates, treatment assignment, exposure, visits, and conversions from a large advertising incrementality setting [Diemert et al., 2018, Criteo AI Lab, 2021]. The experiments use 2,000 ,000 rows, with treated share 0.850 and conversion rate 0.00293 . It is the main large-scale ads dataset. Its treatment imbalance and low conversion rates make it useful for studying sparse conversion certification and randomized reporting-noise sensitivity. 

Hillstrom email experiment : The Hillstrom dataset contains randomized email treatment arms, customer history features, visits, conversions, and spend [Hillstrom, 2008]. The experiments use all 64 ,000 rows, with   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

10 Algorithm 1 Privacy-robust incrementality certification 

Require: Randomized experiment D, segment collection C, ambiguity set U, business thresholds {bs}s∈C ,error level α.

Ensure: Certified set Ccert , rejected set Creject , and unresolved set Cunres . 

> 1:

Identify the cell collection Ccell ⊆ C induced by the reporting partition, and set the per-arm error level to 

αarm = α/ max {2|C cell |, 1}. 

> 2:

Initialize the suppressed set Csupp ← ∅ . 

> 3:

for each segment s ∈ C do  

> 4:

Estimate treated and control degraded means and arm counts in segment s, the inputs to Eqs. (7) and (8).  

> 5:

if the reporting count is below the aggregation threshold then  

> 6:

Mark s as aggregation-suppressed by updating Csupp ← C supp ∪ { s}. 

> 7:

else  

> 8:

Convert U to retained-signal endpoints qa,s and qa,s as in Eq. (7).  

> 9:

Construct simultaneous degraded-mean bounds using αarm , the bounded-outcome Hoeffding radius, and the reporting-noise radius summarized in Eq. (9).  

> 10:

Construct LB s(α; U) and UB s(α; U) by plugging the endpoint worst cases into Eq. (8).  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

Ccert ← { s ∈ C \ C supp : LB s(α; U) > b s} as in Eq. (5).  

> 14:

Creject ← { s ∈ C \ C supp : UB s(α; U) ≤ bs} as in Eq. (5).  

> 15:

Cunres ← C \ (Ccert ∪ C reject ) as in Eq. (5).  

> 16:

return Ccert , Creject , Cunres .treated share 0.667 , conversion rate 0.00903 , and mean spend 1.051 . It is smaller and more interpretable than Criteo. It is useful for segment-level decision analysis because customer history, channel, and demographic-like variables define natural reporting cells. 

7.2 Signal-loss stress layers 

Public datasets provide randomized treatment and outcomes without paired pre-privacy identity graphs and post-privacy production reports, so we introduce controlled signal-loss layers over real randomized experiments. Table 1 gives the reporting-system interpretation of these layers; this subsection describes the corresponding implementation. The experimental implementation uses an explicit stress tuple consisting of match rate, attribution retention, linkable-identity retention, aggregation threshold, and reporting-noise scale. Match-rate loss is implemented by multiplying clean treated and control arm means by a match component that lowers the share of outcomes remaining matchable to the randomized experiment; attribution-window loss is implemented by a second retention component that lowers the matched share retained inside the reporting window; linkability loss is implemented by a third retention component that lowers the share of outcomes still linkable to the same experimental unit. In the aggregate certification frontier, these three components are set equal to q1/3, so their product is the reportable-retention parameter qtrue ∈ { 0.95 , 0.80 , 0.65 , 0.50 , 0.35 , 0.25 }. The corresponding retention half-widths are ω ∈ { 0.04 , 0.06 , 0.08 , 0.10 , 0.12 , 0.14 }, so the decision rule constructs the interval 

[qtrue − ω, q true + ω], clipped to [0 .02 , 1] , and applies the sharp match-loss band and finite-sample band to the degraded arm means. Aggregation-threshold suppression is implemented by checking reported cell counts against m ∈ { 50 , 100 , 150 , 250 , 400 , 600 } for the six aggregate stress settings; suppressed cells are assigned the unresolved state rather than a numerical certificate, and in the granularity analysis the fixed reporting-cell threshold is m = 100 . Randomized reporting noise is implemented as Gaussian arm-total uncertainty with scale σξ , which enters the finite-sample radius after division by the treated and control cell counts. The six aggregate stress settings use σξ = (1 .0, 1.6, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 4.0) for Criteo and σξ = (0 .4, 0.64 , 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.6) 

for Hillstrom. Segment-heterogeneous signal loss is separately implemented in the granularity diagnostic by letting each reporting cell have its own retention interval and noise scale as a function of cell size and a deterministic cell-level jitter, and by adding a data-driven heterogeneity penalty equal to the largest nested   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

11 Figure 2: Population and finite-sample certification frontiers under auditable signal-loss stress layers. The purple curve is the population lower bound, which applies signal-loss uncertainty while treating the degraded arm means as exactly known. The green curve is the finite-sample lower bound, which adds simultaneous randomization uncertainty and randomized reporting-noise uncertainty to the same signal-loss band. A claim can therefore be population-certifiable and still finite-sample unresolved. 

fine-cell treatment-effect deviation inside the reported cell. This keeps the empirical procedure aligned with the theory in the sense that the implementation uses auditable reporting-primitive stress tests over public randomized data, while production identity graphs and conversion timestamps remain unavailable. 

7.3 Population and finite-sample certification 

The first empirical distinction mirrors the two layers of the theory. The population signal-loss band asks what would be certifiable with exactly known degraded arm means and a retention mechanism known only through U. This is the object in Theorem 5.1. The finite-sample band then adds bounded-outcome randomization uncertainty, randomized reporting-noise uncertainty, and multiplicity correction across the reported cells within the evaluated report, as described in Section 5.3. The six stress settings are evaluated as separate planning scenarios, with multiplicity correction applied within each report. A claim can therefore be population-certifiable and still finite-sample unresolved. Figure 2 shows the distinction directly. The population curve answers an identification question that if the degraded report were known without sampling error, would the signal-loss ambiguity set still allow certification? The finite-sample curve answers the deployment question that after adding simultaneous confidence radii and reporting-noise uncertainty, does the lower bound still clear the business threshold? In Criteo, the clean conversion lift is 0.001117 , compared with a business threshold of 0.0005 . The population robust lower bound certifies the claim at q = 0 .95 and q = 0 .80 , with lower bounds 0.000905 and 0.000740 .At q = 0 .65 , it reaches 0.000499 , just below the threshold. The finite-sample lower bound is negative throughout, ranging from −0.00323 at q = 0 .95 to −0.02945 at q = 0 .25 . In Hillstrom, the clean conversion lift is 0.004955 , compared with a threshold of 0.001 . Population certification survives through q = 0 .50 , where the lower bound is 0.001743 , and becomes unresolved at q = 0 .35 and below. As in Criteo, all finite-sample decisions are unresolved. This is the intended output of a conservative measurement system when the released report has limited information for a stronger deployed decision. 

7.4 Sample complexity and information loss 

The second diagnostic connects the finite-sample radius in Eq. (9) , the sufficient sample-size condition in Eq. (10) , and the lower-bound rate in Theorem 5.3. The left panel of Figure 3 evaluates Rad n from Eq. (9) over a grid of per-arm sample sizes n and reportable-retention levels qmin , using B = 1 , |C| = 24 , and 

α = 0 .05 . The plotted curves set σξ = 0 to isolate the retention-driven sampling penalty; the reporting-noise term in Eq. (9) is included in the implementation and affects finite-sample certification in Figure 2. The right   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

12 Figure 3: Sample-complexity and minimax scaling under privacy signal loss. The left panel evaluates the finite-sample radius Rad n from Eq. (9) as the per-arm sample size and reportable-retention lower bound qmin vary. The right panel evaluates the implemented constant-scaled minimax curve 0.08 B/ √qn , corresponding to the universal-constant lower-bound rate in Theorem 5.3. Lower retention enlarges both quantities, showing that privacy signal loss reduces effective information rather than merely adding a removable constant error. 

panel plots the constant-scaled minimax curve 0.08 B/ √qn , which is the implemented visualization of the universal-constant lower-bound rate in Theorem 5.3. Thus the figure compares the upper-bound planning radius used by the certification rule with the information-theoretic lower-bound scale that no estimator can uniformly beat. Figure 3 shows the expected 1/q 2min -type sample burden from the first term of Eq. (10) . To reach Rad n ≤

ε = 0 .02 , the sufficient per-arm sample size is 186 ,669 at qmin = 0 .90 , 604 ,807 at qmin = 0 .50 , and 6.72 

million at qmin = 0 .15 . For a tighter radius ε = 0 .005 , the corresponding qmin = 0 .15 requirement is 107 .5

million per arm. The minimax curve gives the complementary impossibility statement from Theorem 5.3 that when only a small share q of outcomes remains reportable, the effective information scale is qn , so no estimator observing the same degraded report can uniformly recover clean incrementality at the clean-data rate. The sample-complexity panel and the minimax panel therefore make the same point from opposite directions. Eq. (10) states how many observations are sufficient for the deployed bound to shrink, while Theorem 5.3 shows why the q-dependent slowdown is unavoidable. 

7.5 Granularity and segment safety 

The third diagnostic tests the reporting-granularity logic in Section 5.5 and the segment-safety logic above. The experiment forms increasingly fine reporting partitions in both datasets using binary conversion outcomes, 

α = 0 .05 , bounded outcome scale B = 1 , and business thresholds 0.0005 for Criteo and 0.001 for Hillstrom. The Criteo partitions are {f0 }, {f0 , f1 }, {f0 , f1 , f2 }, and {f0 , f1 , f2 , logged exposure }, where the feature buckets are quartile buckets of the anonymized features. The Hillstrom partitions are {channel },

{channel , zip }, {channel , zip , history }, and {channel , zip , history , recency }, with re-cency also quartile-bucketed. For each reported cell g with row count ng , the implementation sets 

bqg = clip 



0.70 + clip 

 log( ng /500) 20 , −0.10 , 0.10 



+ ζg , 0.35 , 0.92 



,

where ζg ∈ [−0.05 , 0.05] is a deterministic cell-level jitter used only to create reproducible segment-heterogeneous signal loss. The retention interval is 

[max {0.02 , bqg − ωg }, min {1, bqg + ωg }] , ωg = 0 .08 + (250 − ng )+

2500 ,

and the reporting-noise scale is 

σξ,g = 1 + (200 − ng )+

200 .  

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

13 Figure 4: Reporting granularity diagnostics. The horizontal axis is the number of reported cells in the partition. The left panel compares the share of cells that clear the population signal-loss lower bound with the share that clear the finite-sample lower bound after simultaneous uncertainty and reporting noise are added. The middle panel reports aggregation-threshold suppression with fixed threshold m = 100 . The right panel reports the empirical segment-heterogeneity penalty, computed as the largest nested fine-cell treatment-effect deviation inside each reported cell and used as a proxy for Hdiam( g) in Eq. (13) . Finer reports reduce this heterogeneity penalty but create smaller cells and more suppression, so aggregate or population-level lift should not be read as subgroup safety. 

Cells with ng < 100 are marked aggregation-suppressed and assigned the unresolved state. Non-suppressed cells are evaluated by the same population and finite-sample certification rules used in Figure 2, with the finite-sample correction applied simultaneously over the cells in the current report. The segment-safety penalty is computed by nesting the finest partition inside every coarser reported cell. For each valid finest cell f ⊂ g with at least 80 rows and both treatment arms present, the implementation computes b∆f = ¯Y1f − ¯Y0f . It then forms the row-weighted average b¯∆g = P  

> f⊂g

wf |g b∆f and uses 

bHdiam( g) = max  

> f⊂g

b∆f − b¯∆g

as the empirical proxy for the heterogeneity term in Eq. (13) . The reported segment-safe lower bound is therefore the finite-sample lower bound minus this penalty. Figure 4 shows why segment certification is difficult under privacy constraints. In Criteo, population cell certification is about 25% for the coarse and medium partitions, 28 .6% for the fine partition, and only 2.8% for the very fine partition. In Hillstrom, population certification is 100% for coarse and medium partitions, 61 .4% 

for the fine partition, and 36 .0% for the very fine partition. Finer reports reduce the empirically estimated nested-cell heterogeneity penalty and create sparse cells with aggregation-threshold suppression. Aggregation-threshold suppression reaches 8.4% in the finest Criteo partition and 39 .5% in the finest Hillstrom partition. In the current stress layers, every finite-sample cell-level decision is unresolved and every segment-safe decision is also unresolved under the three-state rule. This agrees with the theory in the sense that the framework should refuse a subgroup claim when the lower bound, randomized reporting noise, multiplicity correction, and heterogeneity penalty do not jointly clear the business threshold. 

# 8 Discussion 

The proposed framework treats privacy-preserving ads measurement as a causal decision problem under incomplete observation. This framing differs from both pure attribution and pure privacy-protocol design. Attribution asks how to allocate credit among touchpoints. Privacy protocols ask how to report measurements while protecting individuals. Privacy-robust incrementality asks what causal claim remains justified after the measurement signal has been degraded. This distinction matters for platform decisions. A privacy-preserving report can be technically valid yet decision-insufficient. A randomized experiment can be causally valid in design while linkability loss, attribution-window loss, or randomized reporting noise still prevent fine-grained lift certification. The frame-work makes this insufficiency explicit by outputting unresolved claims instead of overconfident estimates.   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

14 9 Limitations and Future Work 

The framework depends on the ambiguity set U. If the analyst excludes plausible signal-loss mechanisms, the certification rule may be too optimistic. The empirical design also uses controlled stress layers because public datasets lack the complete pre-privacy and post-privacy measurement process. The stress layers are semantics-faithful abstractions of modern ads reporting primitives, and their numerical bands should be interpreted as reproducible stress-test results for the stated public-data setting. This limitation reflects the realistic setting for reproducible research on privacy-constrained advertising measurement. Future work should evaluate the framework against production reporting logs or browser-level API traces, richer identity graphs, auction-level ads data, and adaptive experimentation policies that choose between additional measurement and launch decisions. Appendix A provides additional diagnostics that isolate the fiber geometry, privacy-aware MDE behavior, and heterogeneous signal-loss reversals. 

# 10 Conclusion 

Privacy constraints are now part of the statistical environment for advertising measurement. Randomization remains essential, and privacy-degraded reports require an additional certification layer when match-rate loss, linkability loss, attribution-window loss, aggregation-threshold suppression, randomized reporting noise, and segment-heterogeneous signal loss are present. This paper proposes a privacy-robust incrementality framework that converts randomized marketing evidence into certified, rejected, and unresolved decision claims. The empirical results reinforce the theoretical message. Positive clean lift and favorable population lower bounds can still fall short of deployment certification once finite-sample uncertainty and randomized reporting noise are included. The contribution is a frontier-based certification layer for modern ads systems. It preserves the strength of randomized experiments while making explicit when privacy-degraded data are insufficient for a causal decision. 

Code availability. The implementation is available in the GitHub repository. 

# References 

Google Privacy Sandbox. Attribution reporting: Full system overview. https://privacysandbox. google.com/private-advertising/attribution-reporting/system-overview ,2025a. Accessed 2026-05-27. Google Privacy Sandbox. Private aggregation api fundamentals. https://privacysandbox.google. com/private-advertising/private-aggregation/fundamentals , 2025b. Accessed 2026-05-27. Benjamin M. Case, Richa Jain, Alex Koshelev, Andy Leiserson, Daniel Masny, Thurston Sandberg, Ben Savage, Erik Taubeneck, Martin Thomson, and Taiki Yamaguchi. Interoperable private attribution: A distributed attribution and aggregation protocol. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive , 2023. Hidayet Aksu, Badih Ghazi, Pritish Kamath, Ravi Kumar, Pasin Manurangsi, Adam Sealfon, and Avinash V. Varadarajan. Summary reports optimization in the privacy sandbox attribution reporting api. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies , 2024(4):605–621, 2024. doi: 10.56553/popets-2024-0132. Pierre Tholoniat, Kelly Kostopoulou, Peter McNeely, Prabhpreet Singh Sodhi, Anirudh Varanasi, Benjamin Case, Asaf Cidon, Roxana Geambasu, and Mathias Lécuyer. Cookie monster: Efficient on-device budgeting for differentially-private ad-measurement systems. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , pages 693–708, 2024. doi: 10.1145/3694715.3695965.   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

15 Pierre Gutierrez and Jean-Yves Gérardy. Causal inference and uplift modelling: A review of the literature. In Proceedings of The 3rd International Conference on Predictive Applications and APIs , volume 67 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1–13. PMLR, 2017. Leo Guelman, Montserrat Guillén, and Ana M. Pérez-Marín. Ensemble methods for uplift modeling. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 29:1531–1559, 2015. doi: 10.1007/s10618-014-0383-9. Krzysztof Ruda´ s and Szymon Jaroszewicz. Linear regression for uplift modeling. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 32(5):1275–1305, 2018. doi: 10.1007/s10618-018-0576-8. Diego Olaya, Kristof Coussement, and Wouter Verbeke. A survey and benchmarking study of mul-titreatment uplift modeling. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 34(2):273–308, 2020. doi: 10.1007/s10618-019-00670-y. Eustache Diemert, Artem Betlei, Christophe Renaudin, and Massih-Reza Amini. A large scale benchmark for uplift modeling. In Proceedings of the AdKDD and TargetAd Workshop , 2018. Eustache Diemert, Artem Betlei, Christophe Renaudin, Massih-Reza Amini, Théophane Gregoir, and Thibaud Rahier. A large scale benchmark for individual treatment effect prediction and uplift modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.10106 , 2021. Artem Betlei, Eustache Diemert, and Massih-Reza Amini. Treatment targeting by auuc maximization with generalization guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09897 , 2020. Brett R. Gordon, Florian Zettelmeyer, Neha Bhargava, and Dan Chapsky. A comparison of approaches to advertising measurement: Evidence from big field experiments at facebook. Marketing Science , 38(2): 193–225, 2019. doi: 10.1287/mksc.2018.1135. Brett R. Gordon, Robert Moakler, and Florian Zettelmeyer. Close enough? a large-scale exploration of non-experimental approaches to advertising measurement. Marketing Science , 42(4):768–793, 2023. doi: 10.1287/mksc.2022.1413. Garrett A. Johnson. Inferno: A guide to field experiments in online display advertising. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy , 32(3):469–490, 2023. Garrett A. Johnson, Randall A. Lewis, and Elmar I. Nubbemeyer. Ghost ads: Improving the economics of measuring online ad effectiveness. Journal of Marketing Research , 54(6):867–884, 2017. doi: 10.1509/jmr. 15.0297. Randall A. Lewis and Justin M. Rao. On the near impossibility of measuring the returns to advertising. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 130(4):1941–1973, 2015. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjv023. Jon Vaver and Jim Koehler. Measuring ad effectiveness using geo experiments. Technical report, Google, 2011. Aiyou Chen and Timothy C Au. Robust causal inference for incremental return on ad spend with randomized paired geo experiments. The Annals of Applied Statistics , 16(1):1–20, 2022. Kay H. Brodersen, Fabian Gallusser, Jim Koehler, Nicolas Remy, and Steven L. Scott. Inferring causal impact using bayesian structural time-series models. The Annals of Applied Statistics , 9(1):247–274, 2015. doi: 10.1214/14-AOAS788. Ron Berman and Elea McDonnell Feit. Latent stratification for incrementality experiments. Marketing Science ,43(4):903–917, 2024. doi: 10.1287/mksc.2022.0297. Prasad Chalasani, Ari Buchalter, Jaynth Thiagarajan, and Ezra Winston. Counterfactual-based incrementality measurement in a digital ad-buying platform. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.00634 , 2017. Wei Sun, Peng Wang, Dawei Yin, Jian Yang, and Yi Chang. Causal inference via sparse additive models with application to online advertising. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 29, 2015. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v29i1.9156.   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

16 CH Liu, Elaine M Bettaney, and Benjamin Paul Chamberlain. Designing experiments to measure incrementality on facebook. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.02588 , 2018. Brett R Gordon, Robert Moakler, and Florian Zettelmeyer. Predicted incrementality by experimentation (pie) for ad measurement. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2026. Eustache Diemert, Julien Meynet, Pierre Galland, and Damien Lefortier. Attribution modeling increases efficiency of bidding in display advertising. In Proceedings of the ADKDD’17 , pages 1–6. 2017. Ruihuan Du, Yu Zhong, Harikesh Nair, Bo Cui, and Ruyang Shou. Causally driven incremental multi touch attribution using a recurrent neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.00215 , 2019. Di Yao, Chang Gong, Lei Zhang, Sheng Chen, and Jingping Bi. Causalmta: Eliminating the user confounding bias for causal multi-touch attribution. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 4342–4352, 2022. Cynthia Dwork. Differential privacy: A survey of results. In Theory and Applications of Models of Computation , volume 4978 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 1–19. Springer, 2008. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-79228-4_1. Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science , 9(3–4):211–407, 2014. doi: 10.1561/0400000042. John Delaney, Badih Ghazi, Charlie Harrison, Christina Ilvento, Ravi Kumar, Pasin Manurangsi, Martin Pál, Karthik Prabhakar, and Mariana Raykova. Differentially private ad conversion measurement. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies , 2024(2):124–140, 2024. doi: 10.56553/popets-2024-0044. Badih Ghazi, Charlie Harrison, Arpana Hosabettu, Pritish Kamath, Alexander Knop, Ravi Kumar, Mariana Raykova, Pasin Manurangsi, Ethan Leeman, Vikas Sahu, and Phillipp Schoppmann. On the differential privacy and interactivity of privacy sandbox reports. Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies , 2025 (3):382–397, 2025. doi: 10.56553/popets-2025-0104. Meta Audience Network. Update: How to manage apple’s ios 14 live changes. 

https://en-gb.facebook.com/audiencenetwork/resources/blog/ update-how-to-manage-apple-ios-14-live-changes , 2021. Discusses Meta’s Ag-gregated Event Measurement and Apple’s SKAdNetwork. Yingtai Xiao, Jian Du, Shikun Zhang, Wanrong Zhang, Qiang Yan, Danfeng Zhang, and Daniel Kifer. Click without compromise: Online advertising measurement via per user differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2025 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , pages 2919–2937, 2025. doi: 10.1109/SP61157.2025. 00187. Ke Zhong, Yiping Ma, and Sebastian Angel. Ibex: Privacy-preserving ad conversion tracking and bidding. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , pages 3223–3237, 2022. doi: 10.1145/3548606.3560651. Conor O’Brien, Arvind Thiagarajan, Sourav Das, Rafael Barreto, Chetan Verma, Tim Hsu, James Neufield, and Jonathan J Hunt. Challenges and approaches to privacy preserving post-click conversion prediction. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12666 , 2022. Joel L. Horowitz and Charles F. Manski. Nonparametric analysis of randomized experiments with missing covariate and outcome data. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 95(449):77–84, 2000. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2000.10473902. Guido W. Imbens and Charles F. Manski. Confidence intervals for partially identified parameters. Econometrica ,72(6):1845–1857, 2004. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0262.2004.00555.x. Charles F. Manski and John V. Pepper. Monotone instrumental variables: With an application to the returns to schooling. Econometrica , 68(4):997–1010, 2000. doi: 10.1111/1468-0262.00144.   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

17 Amy Richardson, Michael G. Hudgens, Peter B. Gilbert, and Jason P. Fine. Nonparametric bounds and sensitivity analysis of treatment effects. Statistical Science , 29(4):596–618, 2014. doi: 10.1214/14-STS499. Alexander Coppock, Alan S. Gerber, and Donald P. Green. Combining double sampling and bounds to address nonignorable missing outcomes in randomized experiments. Political Analysis , 25(2):188–206, 2017. doi: 10.1017/pan.2016.6. Erin E. Gabriel, Arvid Sjölander, and Michael C. Sachs. Nonparametric bounds for causal effects in imperfect randomized experiments. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 118(541):684–692, 2023. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2021.1950734. Anish Agarwal and Rahul Singh. Causal inference with corrupted data: Measurement error, missing values, discretization, and differential privacy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.02780 , 2021. Yuki Ohnishi and Jordan Awan. Locally private causal inference for randomized experiments. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26:1–40, 2025. Fengshi Niu, Harsha Nori, Brian Quistorff, Rich Caruana, Donald Ngwe, and Aadharsh Kannan. Differentially private estimation of heterogeneous causal effects. In Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning , pages 618–633. PMLR, 2022. Nathan Kallus and Angela Zhou. Confounding-robust policy improvement. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 31, pages 9289–9299, 2018. Adith Swaminathan and Thorsten Joachims. Counterfactual risk minimization: Learning from logged bandit feedback. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 37 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 814–823. PMLR, 2015. Yi Su, Maria Dimakopoulou, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Miroslav Dudík. Doubly robust off-policy evaluation with shrinkage. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 119 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 9167–9176. PMLR, 2020. Prashant Shekhar and Caroline Howard. Choosing online experiment designs under interference in ads, recommendations, and member-experience systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.25290 , 2026a. Prashant Shekhar and Caroline Howard. Support-aware offline policy selection for advertising marketplaces. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.21736 , 2026b. Criteo AI Lab. Criteo uplift prediction dataset. https://ailab.criteo.com/ criteo-uplift-prediction-dataset/ , 2021. Kevin Hillstrom. Minethatdata e-mail analytics and data mining challenge dataset. https://blog. minethatdata.com/2008/03/minethatdata-e-mail-analytics-and-data.html ,2008. Accessed via public dataset archive.   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

18 Figure 5: Sharp compatibility fiber for a controlled degraded-report example. This diagnostic is not dataset-specific. It fixes degraded treated and control means eμ1 = 0 .12 and eμ0 = 0 .08 , with retention ambiguity q ∈ [0 .5, 1.0] . The shaded interval is the full set of clean incrementality values compatible with the same released report and ambiguity set. A business threshold below the interval is certifiable, a threshold at or above the interval is rejectable, and a threshold inside the interval is unresolved because compatible clean worlds exist on both sides of the decision boundary. 

# A Additional Empirical Diagnostics 

The main paper reports three empirical diagnostics: the certification frontier, the sample-complexity and mini-max scaling curves, and the reporting-granularity tradeoff. The appendix records the supporting diagnostics used to validate the remaining theoretical components. 

A.1 Compatibility fiber diagnostics 

Figure 5 isolates the information-geometric object behind Theorem 5.1 and Lemma B.1. The degraded report has treated mean 0.12 , control mean 0.08 , and retention interval [0 .5, 1.0] . The corresponding sharp clean incrementality fiber is [−0.04 , 0.16] . A business threshold inside this interval is intrinsically unresolved from the released report, while thresholds outside the interval are decidable at the population level. This diagnostic is deliberately one-dimensional because it makes the core geometry visible. 

A.2 Privacy-aware detectable effects 

Figure 6 supports Proposition B.2. It evaluates Eq. (12) over effective per-arm cell sizes from 100 to 300 ,000 

and reporting-noise scales σξ ∈ { 0, 1, 3, 10 }, using σs = 0 .5, α = 0 .05 , β = 0 .2, and N1s = N0s = Ns.At Ns = 100 , the privacy-aware MDE is 0.198 without reporting noise and 0.443 when σξ = 10 . At 

Ns = 300 ,000 , all curves are near 0.00362 . Thus randomized reporting noise is most damaging for small cells, which is the same regime where aggregation-threshold suppression and segment-level reporting are operationally most tempting. 

A.3 Heterogeneous signal-loss reversal 

Figure 7 visualizes the constructive example in Appendix B.5. The construction contains two segments with equal weights and clean control mean zero. In world u, segment 1 has clean treated mean 1 and retention 0.5,while segment 2 has clean treated mean 0. In world u′, the segment roles are reversed. Both worlds produce the same aggregate degraded treated mean 0.25 . The appendix diagnostic then applies the same match-loss   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

19 Figure 6: Privacy-aware minimum detectable effects. Reporting noise increases the detectable-effect floor most strongly for small effective cell sizes, while large cells dilute the noise contribution. 

Figure 7: Heterogeneous signal loss can reverse segment decisions. Two clean segment-level worlds induce the same aggregate degraded report, while the lower-bound certification rule certifies different segments. lower-bound rule used by the main certification implementation. At threshold b = 0 .25 , world u gives segment 1 band [0 .5, 1.0] and segment 2 band [0 , 0] , so segment 1 certifies and segment 2 rejects. World u′ reverses these bands and certifies segment 2 instead. This example explains why aggregate privacy-degraded lift should not be interpreted as segment safety when signal loss may vary across segments. 

# B Supporting Results and Proofs 

Lemma B.1 (Fiber projection is the sharp identified set) . Fix a segment s, a released report rs, an ambiguity set 

U, and the compatibility fiber Fs(rs; U) in Eq. (3) . Suppose Fs(rs; U) is nonempty. The set of incrementality values that can be induced by clean worlds compatible with the report is 

{∆s(ηs) : ηs ∈ F s(rs; U)}.

Its closed convex hull is the interval 

[ℓ⋆s (rs; U), u ⋆s (rs; U)]   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

20 defined in Eq. (4) . No uniformly valid procedure that observes only rs can replace this interval by a strict subinterval without excluding a compatible clean world. Proof. By definition, ηs ∈ F s(rs; U) if and only if there is at least one signal-loss mechanism u ∈ U under which the clean world ηs can generate the released report rs. Therefore the set of clean incrementality values that cannot be ruled out from rs is exactly 

Ds(rs; U) = {∆s(ηs) : ηs ∈ F s(rs; U)}.

The smallest closed interval containing this set is 

"

inf  

> ηs∈F s(rs;U)

∆s(ηs), sup 

> ηs∈F s(rs;U)

∆s(ηs)

#

,

which is Eq. (4). This proves that the fiber projection is an outer bound on all compatible clean effects. It remains to show sharpness. Suppose a procedure observing only rs reports a strict subinterval I of this projection interval while claiming uniform validity over U. Because I is strict, there is some value 

δ ∈ D s(rs; U) outside I, or there is a sequence of compatible values converging to a boundary point outside I.In the first case, choose η◦ 

> s

∈ F s(rs; U) with ∆s(η◦ 

> s

) = δ. The report rs is compatible with η◦ 

> s

, so excluding δ

violates validity in that clean world. In the boundary case, the same conclusion follows by taking a compatible value sufficiently close to the excluded boundary. Hence no uniformly valid report-based procedure can improve on the fiber projection without additional assumptions. 

B.1 Proof of Theorem 5.1 

Proof. Fix segment s and arm a. The degraded mean satisfies 

eμa,s = qa,s μa,s , qa,s ∈ [qa,s , q a,s ], 0 ≤ μa,s ≤ B. 

For any feasible retention rate qa,s , the clean mean must be 

μa,s = eμa,s /q a,s .

Since qa,s 7 → eμa,s /q a,s is decreasing on the positive interval [qa,s , q a,s ], the smallest feasible clean mean is obtained at qa,s = qa,s , and the largest feasible clean mean is obtained at qa,s = qa,s , subject to the outcome bound B. Thus the arm-specific feasible interval is 

Ia,s =

"eμa,s 

qa,s 

, min 

(

B, eμa,s 

qa,s 

)# 

.

Every point in this interval is attainable, which is the step that proves sharpness rather than only validity of the outer bound. If μ ∈ I a,s and eμa,s > 0, choose q = eμa,s /μ , which lies in the retention interval by construction. Then construct a bounded clean outcome with mean μ, for example Y (a) = B with probability μ/B and 

Y (a) = 0 otherwise. Let the outcome be reported with probability q, independently conditional on the arm and segment. The degraded mean is then qμ = eμa,s . If eμa,s = 0 , then Ia,s = {0} because retention is bounded away from zero, and choosing any admissible q with μ = 0 attains the interval. Thus Ia,s is exactly the set of clean arm means compatible with the degraded arm mean, not merely a conservative superset. The treatment and control arm means can be chosen independently within I1,s and I0,s . Therefore the identified set for ∆s = μ1,s − μ0,s is the Minkowski difference 

I1,s − I 0,s =

"

inf 

> μ1∈I 1,s , μ 0∈I 0,s

(μ1 − μ0), sup 

> μ1∈I 1,s , μ 0∈I 0,s

(μ1 − μ0)

#

,  

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

21 which is exactly [ℓs(U), u s(U)] in Eq. (7) . Any δ inside this interval can be written as δ = μ1 − μ0 for some 

μ1 ∈ I 1,s and μ0 ∈ I 0,s , so the interval is sharp. The first two decision statements follow immediately from this sharpness. If ℓs(U) > b s, every compatible clean world has ∆s > b s, so positive incrementality is certifiable uniformly over U. If us(U) ≤ bs, every compatible clean world has ∆s ≤ bs, so non-incrementality relative to bs is rejectable uniformly over U.It remains to prove the lower-bound statement for the unresolved region. Suppose ℓs(U) ≤ bs < u s(U).By sharpness, there exists a compatible clean world η− and a mechanism u− ∈ U with ∆s(η−) ≤ bs that produces the observed degraded arm means. Likewise, because bs < u s(U), there exists a compatible clean world η+ and a mechanism u+ ∈ U with ∆s(η+) > b s that produces the same degraded arm means. Let 

P− and P+ denote the corresponding released-report distributions. In the deterministic degraded-report case these distributions are identical point masses at the observed report. With randomized reporting noise, take the same released noisy report distribution conditional on the same degraded arm means, so P− = P+ as well. Thus the released report contains no information that distinguishes the below-or-at-threshold world from the above-threshold world. Now consider any binary rule φ mapping released reports to {certify , not certify }. Let A = {r : φ(r) = certify }. Under P−, certification is a false positive, so the false-certification probability is P−(A). Under P+,non-certification is a false negative, so the false-noncertification probability is P+(Ac). Since P+ = P−,

P−(A) + P+(Ac) = P−(A) + P−(Ac) = 1 .

Therefore 

max {P−(A), P +(Ac)} ≥ 12 .

Equivalently, every binary rule has worst-case error at least 1/2. More generally, the same argument with two nonidentical report distributions gives the lower bound 

max {P+(φ̸ = certify) , P −(φ = certify) } ≥ 1 − TV( P+, P −)2 ,

because P+(A) − P−(A) ≤ TV( P+, P −) for every measurable certification set A. Finally, uniform validity rules out certification for this report because η− is compatible and has ∆s ≤ bs. Uniform validity also rules out rejection because η+ is compatible and has ∆s > b s. The only uniformly valid output is therefore unresolved. 

B.2 Proof of Proposition 5.2 

Proof. Fix an arm a and segment s. Let 

eμa,s = E[ eYi | Ai = a, i ∈ s]

be the population degraded arm mean, and let 

beμa,s = ¯eY a,s + ξa,s 

ns

be the released degraded arm mean after randomized reporting noise. Here ¯eY a,s is the empirical degraded mean before reporting noise, ns ≥ n is the number of randomized units in the arm-segment cell, and ξa,s is the noise added to the released arm total. The released mean error decomposes as 

beμa,s − eμa,s =

 ¯eY a,s − eμa,s 



+ ξa,s 

ns

.  

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

22 Since 0 ≤ eYi ≤ B, Hoeffding’s lemma implies that ¯eY a,s − eμa,s is sub-Gaussian with variance proxy 

B2/(4 ns). The reporting-noise term ξa,s /n s is sub-Gaussian with variance proxy σ2 

> ξ

/n 2

> s

. Because the randomized reporting noise is independent of the sample draw, their sum is sub-Gaussian with variance proxy 

va,s = B2

4ns

+ σ2

> ξ

n2

> s

≤ B2

4n + σ2

> ξ

n2 .

Let L = log(4 |C| /α ). The sub-Gaussian tail bound gives 

P

 beμa,s − eμa,s > p2va,s L



≤ 2e−L = α

2|C| .

There are 2|C| arm-segment means, so a union bound implies simultaneous control over both arms and all segments with probability at least 1 − α. Moreover, 

p2va,s L ≤ B

r L

2n + σξ

n

√2L ≡ rn,

where the last inequality uses ns ≥ n and √x + y ≤ √x + √y. Therefore, on the simultaneous event, 

beμa,s − eμa,s ≤ rn

for every arm and segment. The clean arm mean is obtained from a degraded mean by division by an admissible retention rate. Because every admissible retention rate is at least qmin , an arm-level degraded-mean error of size rn changes any compatible clean arm mean by at most rn/q min . The treatment effect is a difference of two arm means, so the finite-sample expansion of the population signal-loss band has radius 

Rad n = 2rn

qmin 

= 2Bqmin 

r log(4 |C| /α )2n + 2σξ

qmin n

p2 log(4 |C| /α ).

This proves Eq. (9). To obtain the displayed sufficient sample size, require each term in Rad n to be at most ε/ 2. The sampling term is at most ε/ 2 when 

n ≥ 8B2

q2min ε2 log 4|C| 

α .

The reporting-noise term is at most ε/ 2 when 

n ≥ 4σξ

qmin ε

r

2 log 4|C| 

α .

Combining these two sufficient inequalities gives Eq. (10) up to universal constants. Finally, [ℓs(U), u s(U)] 

is the population compatibility band from signal-loss uncertainty. The proof above only adds and removes finite-sample radius around this band; the identification width itself remains. Thus us(U) − ℓs(U) persists even as n → ∞ unless the retention ambiguity set tightens. 

B.3 Proof of Theorem 5.3 

Proof. We first prove the sampling lower bound when the retention probability q is known. A lower bound for a restricted subproblem is also a lower bound for the full model, so it is enough to hold the control arm fixed and vary only the treated arm. Set p0 = 1 /2. The target becomes 

∆ = B(p1 − p0) = B



p1 − 12



.  

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

23 For treated units, Yi(1) /B ∼ Bernoulli( p1) and Ri(1) ∼ Bernoulli( q) independently. Therefore the normal-ized degraded observation 

eYi(1) 

B = Ri(1) Yi(1) 

B

is Bernoulli with success probability qp 1. Signal loss has therefore reduced the effective Bernoulli success probability by a factor q, which is where the information loss enters. Choose two treated-arm conversion probabilities 

p− 

> 1

= 12 , p+1 = 12 + h, 

where 0 < h ≤ 1/4. Both probabilities lie in [1 /4, 3/4] . The corresponding clean incrementality values are 

∆− = 0 , ∆+ = Bh, 

so their separation is Bh . Let P− and P+ denote the laws of the n degraded treated-arm observations under these two worlds. Then 

P− = Bernoulli( q/ 2) ⊗n, P+ = Bernoulli 



q

 12 + h

 ⊗n

.

We next choose h so these two clean effects are separated, while the degraded experiments remain hard to distinguish. For Bernoulli probabilities r and r + δ, with 0 < r < r + δ < 1,

KL(Bernoulli( r) ∥ Bernoulli( r + δ)) ≤ δ2

(r + δ)(1 − r − δ) .

Here r = q/ 2 and δ = qh . Because h ≤ 1/4,

r + δ = q

 12 + h



≥ q

2 , 1 − r − δ = 1 − q

 12 + h



≥ 14 ,

where the second inequality uses q ≤ 1. Hence (r + δ)(1 − r − δ) ≥ q/ 8, and the one-observation KL divergence is at most 8qh 2. Tensorization of KL divergence over n independent observations gives 

KL( P− ∥ P+) ≤ 8nqh 2.

Choose 

h = c0

√qn 

with c0 > 0 sufficiently small and qn sufficiently large so that h ≤ 1/4 and KL( P− ∥ P+) ≤ 1/8. Pinsker’s inequality then gives 

TV( P−, P +) ≤

r KL( P− ∥ P+)2 ≤ 14 .

Let b∆ be any estimator based on the degraded observations. The expectation form of Le Cam’s two-point argument follows from the identity 

Z

min {dP −, dP +} = 1 − TV( P−, P +).

For every possible estimator value t,

|t − ∆−| + |t − ∆+| ≥ | ∆+ − ∆−| = Bh. 

Integrating this inequality with respect to the common part min {dP −, dP +} yields 

E−| b∆ − ∆−| + E+| b∆ − ∆+| ≥ Bh {1 − TV( P−, P +)}.  

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

24 Therefore 

sup 

> θ∈{− ,+}

Eθ | b∆ − ∆θ | ≥ Bh 

2 {1 − TV( P−, P +)} ≥ 3Bh 

8 .

Substituting h = c0/√qn gives 

sup 

> p0,p 1∈[1 /4,3/4]

Ep0,p 1 | b∆ − B(p1 − p0)| ≥ c B

√qn 

for a universal constant c > 0. This proves the stated minimax estimation-rate lower bound. The sample-size form follows from the same construction. If an estimator had absolute error at most ε with high constant probability uniformly over the class, then, whenever ε < Bh/ 2, the intervals [∆ − − ε, ∆− + ε]

and [∆ + − ε, ∆+ + ε] would be disjoint. Thresholding b∆ at (∆ − + ∆ +)/2 would then produce a test that distinguishes P− from P+ with the same high constant success probability. The best possible success probability for testing two simple hypotheses with equal prior is (1 + TV( P−, P +)) /2, which is at most 

5/8 under the construction above. Thus constant-probability estimation error ε requires ε ≳ Bh . Since 

h = c0/√qn , this implies 

n ≳ B2

qε 2 ,

which gives the displayed lower bound up to a universal constant. We now prove the non-vanishing ambiguity lower bound when the retention probability is not known exactly. This part is an identification argument rather than a sampling argument, so it remains even with infinite data. Consider a one-arm subproblem with the control mean fixed at zero. Let the observed degraded treated mean be 

eμ = qB 

2 .

This single degraded mean is compatible with two different clean worlds. In the first world, the retention probability is q = q, so the compatible clean treated mean is 

μ+ = eμq = B

2 .

In the second world, the retention probability is q = q, so the compatible clean treated mean is 

μ− = eμq = B

2

qq .

Both clean means lie in [0 , B ], both retention probabilities lie in the ambiguity set [q, q ], and both worlds induce exactly the same degraded report because qμ = eμ in both cases. Their clean incrementality values differ by 

μ+ − μ− = B

2



1 − qq



.

Any estimator that observes only the degraded report must return the same numerical value in these two worlds. For any number t,

max {| t − μ+|, |t − μ−|} ≥ μ+ − μ−

2 .

Consequently the worst-case absolute error over these two compatible clean worlds is at least 

B

4



1 − qq



.

This proves the non-vanishing identification lower bound. 

Proposition B.2 (Privacy-aware MDE derivation) . For a two-arm randomized experiment with assignment-unit variance proxy σ2 

> s

, effective per-arm cell size Ns, and independent reporting-noise variance σ2 

> ξ

added to each arm total, the normal-approximation minimum detectable effect is Eq. (12) .  

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

25 B.4 Proof of Proposition B.2 

Proof. Let b∆priv  

> s

denote the reported treated-control difference in segment s. Under a balanced effective per-arm sample size Ns, the randomization variance proxy for a difference in means is 

Var rand ( b∆s) ≈ σ2

> s

Ns

+ σ2

> s

Ns

= 2σ2

> s

Ns

.

If the reported treated and control totals include independent mean-zero randomized reporting noises ξ1s and 

ξ0s with variance σ2 

> ξ

, then the reported means contain additional noise terms ξ1s/N 1s and ξ0s/N 0s. Because these noises are independent and enter the difference with opposite signs, their variance contribution is 

σ2

> ξ

 1

N 21s

+ 1

N 20s



.

Adding the randomization and reporting-noise contributions gives the variance inside Eq. (12) . For a normal-approximation power calculation, a two-sided level-α test rejects when the estimated effect exceeds z1−α/ 2

standard errors under the null. To have power 1 − β against an alternative effect size d, the mean shift d must exceed this rejection threshold by another z1−β standard errors. Thus, with SE denoting standard error, 

d =  z1−α/ 2 + z1−β

 SE .

Substituting the privacy-aware standard error gives Eq. (12) . The sample-size statement follows because certification requires the statistically detectable effect to be no larger than the robust population margin 

ℓs(U) − bs; solving that inequality over feasible allocations gives the required sample size. 

B.5 Heterogeneous signal-loss reversal example 

This example shows that aggregate privacy-degraded lift can be compatible with opposite segment-level certification decisions. Let outcomes be bounded by B = 1 , let the two segments have equal population weight, and let the clean control mean be zero in both segments. Let the ambiguity set allow segment-specific treated-arm retention rates in [1 /2, 1] ; control retention is irrelevant because the clean control means are zero. Under mechanism u, set the clean treated means to 

μ1,1 = 1 , μ1,2 = 0 ,

and choose treated retention rates 

q1,1 = 1 /2, q1,2 = 1 .

The degraded treated means are eμ1,1 = 1 /2 and eμ1,2 = 0 , so the aggregate degraded treated mean is 1/4. The aggregate degraded control mean is zero. Under mechanism u′, reverse the segment roles: 

μ′ 

> 1,1

= 0 , μ′ 

> 1,2

= 1 ,

with treated retention rates 

q′ 

> 1,1

= 1 , q′ 

> 1,2

= 1 /2.

The degraded treated means are eμ′ 

> 1,1

= 0 and eμ′ 

> 1,2

= 1 /2, so the aggregate degraded treated mean is again 

1/4, and the aggregate degraded control mean is again zero. Thus the two worlds have the same aggregate degraded lift. The segment-level lower-bound decisions are opposite. Under u, the segment 1 degraded treated mean is 1/2,its control mean is zero, and the largest admissible retention rate is 1, so the segment-level lower bound is at least 1/2. Segment 2 has degraded treated and control means equal to zero, so both its lower and upper bounds are zero. Thus for any b ∈ (0 , 1/2) , the lower-bound rule certifies segment 1 and rejects segment 2. Under u′,the same argument certifies segment 2 and rejects segment 1. The aggregate degraded report is unchanged across the two constructions. The example shows that aggregate certification cannot imply segment-level certification unless U restricts how signal loss can vary across segments.   

> 1Corresponding author: shekharp@erau.edu

26